




and presented him with a sword and a belt, on which were written these
words embroidered in letters of gold:
  “Here’s the right valiant Cornish man,
  Who slew the giant Cormoran.”
The news of Jack’s victory soon spread over all the West of England,
so that another giant, named Blunderbore, hearing of it, vowed to be
revenged on Jack, if ever he should light on him. This giant was the
lord of an enchanted castle situated in the midst of a lonesome wood.
Now Jack, about four months afterwards, walking near this wood in his
journey to Wales, being weary, seated himself near a pleasant fountain
and fell fast asleep. While he was sleeping, the giant, coming there
for water, discovered him, and knew him to be the far-famed Jack the
Giant-killer by the lines written on the belt. Without ado, he took
Jack on his shoulders and carried him towards his castle. Now, as they
passed through a thicket, the rustling of the boughs awakened Jack,
who was strangely surprised to find himself in the clutches of the
giant. His terror was only begun, for, on entering the castle, he saw
the ground strewed with human bones, and the giant told him his own
would ere long be among them. After this the giant locked poor Jack in
an immense chamber, leaving him there while he went to fetch another
giant, his brother, living in the same wood, who might share in the
meal on Jack.
After waiting some time Jack, on going to the window beheld afar off
the two giants coming towards the castle. “Now,” quoth Jack to
himself, “my death or my deliverance is at hand.” Now, there were
strong cords in a corner of the room in which Jack was, and two of
these he took, and made a strong noose at the end; and while the
giants were unlocking the iron gate of the castle he threw the ropes
over each of their heads. Then he drew the other ends across a beam,
and pulled with all his might, so that he throttled them. Then, when
he saw they were black in the face, he slid down the rope, and drawing
his sword, slew them both. Then, taking the giant’s keys, and
unlocking the rooms, he found three fair ladies tied by the hair of
their heads, almost starved to death. “Sweet ladies,” quoth Jack, “I
have destroyed this monster and his brutish brother, and obtained your
liberties.” This said he presented them with the keys, and so
proceeded on his journey to Wales.
Jack made the best of his way by travelling as fast as he could, but
lost his road, and was benighted, and could find any habitation until,
coming into a narrow valley, he found a large house, and in order to
get shelter took courage to knock at the gate. But what was his
surprise when there came forth a monstrous giant with two heads; yet
he did not appear so fiery as the others were, for he was a Welsh
giant, and what he did was by private and secret malice under the
false show of friendship. Jack, having told his condition to the
giant, was shown into a bedroom, where, in the dead of night, he heard
his host in another apartment muttering these words:
  “Though here you lodge with me this night,
  You shall not see the morning light
  My club shall dash your brains outright!”
“Say’st thou so,” quoth Jack; “that is like one of your Welsh tricks,
yet I hope to be cunning enough for you.” Then, getting out of bed, he
laid a billet in the bed in his stead, and hid himself in a corner of
the room. At the dead time of the night in came the Welsh giant, who
struck several heavy blows on the bed with his club, thinking he had
broken every bone in Jack’s skin. The next morning Jack, laughing in
his sleeve, gave him hearty thanks for his night’s lodging. “How have
you rested?” quoth the giant; “did you not feel anything in the
night?” “No,” quoth Jack, “nothing but a rat, which gave me two or
three slaps with her tail.” With that, greatly wondering, the giant
led Jack to breakfast, bringing him a bowl containing four gallons of
hasty pudding. Being loth to let the giant think it too much for him,
Jack put a large leather bag under his loose coat, in such a way that
he could convey the pudding into it without its being perceived. Then,
telling the giant he would show him a trick, taking a knife, Jack
ripped open the bag, and out came all the hasty pudding. Whereupon,
saying, “Odds splutters hur nails, hur can do that trick hurself,” the
monster took the knife, and ripping open his belly, fell down dead.
Now, it happened in these days that King Arthur’s only son asked his
father to give him a large sum of money, in order that he might go and
seek his fortune in the principality of Wales, where lived a beautiful
lady possessed with seven evil spirits. The king did his best to
persuade his son from it, but in vain; so at last gave way and the
prince set out with two horses, one loaded with money, the other for
himself to ride upon. Now, after several days’ travel, he came to a
market-town in Wales, where he beheld a vast crowd of people gathered
together. The prince asked the reason of it, and was told that they
had arrested a corpse for several large sums of money which the
deceased owed when he died. The prince replied that it was a pity
creditors should be so cruel, and said: “Go bury the dead, and let his
creditors come to my lodging, and there their debts shall be paid."
They came, in such great numbers that before night he had only
twopence left for himself.
Now Jack the Giant-Killer, coming that way, was so taken with the
generosity of the prince, that he desired to be his servant. This
being agreed upon, the next morning they set forward on their journey
together, when, as they were riding out of the town, an old woman
called after the prince, saying, “He has owed me twopence these seven
years; pray pay me as well as the rest.” Putting his hand to his
pocket, the prince gave the woman all he had left, so that after their
day’s food, which cost what small spell Jack had by him, they were
without a penny between them.
When the sun got low, the king’s son said: “Jack, since we have no
money, where can we lodge this night?”
But Jack replied: “Master, we’ll do well enough, for I have an uncle
lives within two miles of this place; he is a huge and monstrous giant
with three heads; he’ll fight five hundred men in armour, and make
them to fly before him.” “Alas!” quoth the prince, “what shall we do
there? He’ll certainly chop us up at a mouthful. Nay, we are scarce
enough to fill one of his hollow teeth!”
“It is no matter for that,” quoth Jack; “I myself will go before and
prepare the way for you; therefore stop here and wait till I return."
Jack then rode away at full speed, and coming to the gate of the
castle, he knocked so loud that he made the neighbouring hills
resound. The giant roared out at this like thunder: “Who’s there?”
Jack answered: “None but your poor cousin Jack.”
Quoth he: “What news with my poor cousin Jack?”
He replied: “Dear uncle, heavy news, God wot!”
“Prithee,” quoth the giant, “what heavy news can come to me? I am a
giant with three heads, and besides thou knowest I can fight five
hundred men in armour, and make them fly like chaff before the wind.”
“Oh, but,” quoth Jack, “here’s the king’s son a-coming with a thousand
men in armour to kill you and destroy all that you have!”
“Oh, cousin Jack,” said the giant, “this is heavy news indeed! I will
immediately run and hide myself, and thou shalt lock, bolt, and bar me
in, and keep the keys until the prince is gone.” Having secured the
giant, Jack fetched his master, when they made themselves heartily
merry whilst the poor giant lay trembling in a vault under the ground.
Early in the morning Jack furnished his master with a fresh supply of
gold and silver, and then sent him three miles forward on his journey,
at which time the prince was pretty well out of the smell of the
giant. Jack then returned, and let the giant out of the vault, who
asked what he should give him for keeping the castle from destruction.
“Why,” quoth Jack, “I want nothing but the old coat and cap, together
with the old rusty sword and slippers which are at your bed’s head."
Quoth the giant: “You know not what you ask; they are the most
precious things I have. The coat will keep you invisible, the cap will
tell you all you want to know, the sword cuts asunder whatever you
strike, and the shoes are of extraordinary swiftness. But you have
been very serviceable to me, therefore take them with all my heart."
Jack thanked his uncle, and then went off with them. He soon overtook
his master and they quickly arrived at the house of the lady the
prince sought, who, finding the prince to be a suitor, prepared a
splendid banquet for him. After the repast was concluded, she told him
she had a task for him. She wiped his mouth with a handkerchief,
saying: “You must show me that handkerchief to-morrow morning, or else
you will lose your head.” With that she put it in her bosom. The
prince went to bed in great sorrow, but Jack’s cap of knowledge
informed him how it was to be obtained. In the middle of the night she
called upon her familiar spirit to carry her to Lucifer. But Jack put
on his coat of darkness and his shoes of swiftness, and was there as
soon as she was. When she entered the place of the Old One, she gave
the handkerchief to old Lucifer, who laid it upon a shelf, whence Jack
took it and brought it to his master, who showed it to the lady next
day, and so saved his life. On that day, she gave the prince a kiss
and told him he must show her the lips to-morrow morning that she
kissed last night, or lose his head.
“Ah!” he replied, “if you kiss none but mine, I will.”
“That is neither here nor there,” said she; “if you do not, death’s
your portion!”
At midnight she went as before, and was angry with old Lucifer for
letting the handkerchief go. “But now,” quoth she, “I will be too hard
for the king’s son, for I will kiss thee, and he is to show me thy
lips.” Which she did, and Jack, when she was not standing by, cut off
Lucifer’s head and brought it under his invisible coat to his master,
who the next morning pulled it out by the horns before the lady. This
broke the enchantment and the evil spirit left her, and she appeared
in all her beauty. They were married the next morning, and soon after
went to the court of King Arthur, where Jack for his many great
exploits, was made one of the Knights of the Round Table.
Jack soon went searching for giants again, but he had not ridden far,
when he saw a cave, near the entrance of which he beheld a giant
sitting upon a block of timber, with a knotted iron club by his side.
His goggle eyes were like flames of fire, his countenance grim and
ugly, and his cheeks like a couple of large flitches of bacon, while
the bristles of his beard resembled rods of iron wire, and the locks
that hung down upon his brawny shoulders were like curled snakes or
hissing adders. Jack alighted from his horse, and, putting on the coat
of darkness, went up close to the giant, and said softly: “Oh! are you
there? It will not be long before I take you fast by the beard.” The
giant all this while could not see him, on account of his invisible
coat, so that Jack, coming up close to the monster, struck a blow with
his sword at his head, but, missing his aim, he cut off the nose
instead. At this, the giant roared like claps of thunder, and began to
lay about him with his iron club like one stark mad. But Jack, running
behind, drove his sword up to the hilt in the giant’s back, so that he
fell down dead. This done, Jack cut off the giant’s head, and sent it,
with his brother’s also, to King Arthur, by a waggoner he hired for
that purpose.
Jack now resolved to enter the giant’s cave in search of his treasure,
and, passing along through a great many windings and turnings, he came
at length to a large room paved with freestone, at the upper end of
which was a boiling caldron, and on the right hand a large table, at
which the giant used to dine. Then he came to a window, barred with
iron, through which he looked and beheld a vast number of miserable
captives, who, seeing him, cried out: “Alas! young man, art thou come
to be one amongst us in this miserable den?”
“Ay,” quoth Jack, “but pray tell me what is the meaning of your
captivity?”
“We are kept here,” said one, “till such time as the giants have a
wish to feast, and then the fattest among us is slaughtered! And many
are the times they have dined upon murdered men!”
“Say you so,” quoth Jack, and straightway unlocked the gate and let
them free, who all rejoiced like condemned men at sight of a pardon.
Then searching the giant’s coffers, he shared the gold and silver
equally amongst them and took them to a neighbouring castle, where
they all feasted and made merry over their deliverance.
But in the midst of all this mirth a messenger brought news that one
Thunderdell, a giant with two heads, having heard of the death of his
kinsmen, had come from the northern dales to be revenged on Jack, and
was within a mile of the castle, the country people flying before him
like chaff. But Jack was not a bit daunted, and said: “Let him come! I
have a tool to pick his teeth; and you, ladies and gentlemen, walk out
into the garden, and you shall witness this giant Thunderdell’s death
and destruction.”
The castle was situated in the midst of a small island surrounded by a
moat thirty feet deep and twenty feet wide, over which lay a
drawbridge. So Jack employed men to cut through this bridge on both
sides, nearly to the middle; and then, dressing himself in his
invisible coat, he marched against the giant with his sword of
sharpness. Although the giant could not see Jack, he smelt his
approach, and cried out in these words:
  “Fee, fi, fo, fum!
  I smell the blood of an Englishman!
  Be he alive or be he dead,
  I’ll grind his bones to make me bread!”
“Say’st thou so,” said Jack; “then thou art a monstrous miller
indeed.”
The giant cried out again: “Art thou that villain who killed my
kinsmen? Then I will tear thee with my teeth, suck thy blood, and
grind thy bones to powder.”
“You’ll have to catch me first,” quoth Jack, and throwing off his
invisible coat, so that the giant might see him, and putting on his
shoes of swiftness, he ran from the giant, who followed like a walking
castle, so that the very foundations of the earth seemed to shake at
every step. Jack led him a long dance, in order that the gentlemen and
ladies might see; and at last to end the matter, ran lightly over the
drawbridge, the giant, in full speed, pursuing him with his club.
Then, coming to the middle of the bridge, the giant’s great weight
broke it down, and he tumbled headlong into the water, where he rolled
and wallowed like a whale. Jack, standing by the moat, laughed at him
all the while; but though the giant foamed to hear him scoff, and
plunged from place to place in the moat, yet he could not get out to
be revenged. Jack at length got a cart-rope and cast it over the two
heads of the giant, and drew him ashore by a team of horses, and then
cut off both his heads with his sword of sharpness, and sent them to
King Arthur.
After some time spent in mirth and pastime, Jack, taking leave of the
knights and ladies, set out for new adventures. Through many woods he
passed, and came at length to the foot of a high mountain. Here, late
at night, he found a lonesome house, and knocked at the door, which
was opened by an aged man with a head as white as snow. “Father,” said
Jack, “can you lodge a benighted traveller that has lost his way?"
“Yes,” said the old man; “you are right welcome to my poor cottage."
Whereupon Jack entered, and down they sat together, and the old man
began to speak as follows: “Son, I see by your belt you are the great
conqueror of giants, and behold, my son, on the top of this mountain
is an enchanted castle, this is kept by a giant named Galligantua, and
he by the help of an old conjurer, betrays many knights and ladies
into his castle, where by magic art they are transformed into sundry
shapes and forms. But above all, I grieve for a duke’s daughter, whom
they fetched from her father’s garden, carrying her through the air in
a burning chariot drawn by fiery dragons, when they secured her within
the castle, and transformed her into a white hind. And though many
knights have tried to break the enchantment, and work her deliverance,
yet no one could accomplish it, on account of two dreadful griffins
which are placed at the castle gate and which destroy every one who
comes near. But you, my son, may pass by them undiscovered, where on
the gates of the castle you will find engraven in large letters how
the spell may be broken.” Jack gave the old man his hand, and promised
that in the morning he would venture his life to free the lady.
In the morning Jack arose and put on his invisible coat and magic cap
and shoes, and prepared himself for the fray. Now, when he had reached
the top of the mountain he soon discovered the two fiery griffins, but
passed them without fear, because of his invisible coat. When he had
got beyond them, he found upon the gates of the castle a golden
trumpet hung by a silver chain, under which these lines were engraved:
  “Whoever shall this trumpet blow,
  Shall soon the giant overthrow,
  And break the black enchantment straight;
  So all shall be in happy state.”
Jack had no sooner read this but he blew the trumpet, at which the
castle trembled to its vast foundations, and the giant and conjurer
were in horrid confusion, biting their thumbs and tearing their hair,
knowing their wicked reign was at an end. Then the giant stooping to
take up his club, Jack at one blow cut off his head; whereupon the
conjurer, mounting up into the air, was carried away in a whirlwind.
Then the enchantment was broken, and all the lords and ladies who had
so long been transformed into birds and beasts returned to their
proper shapes, and the castle vanished away in a cloud of smoke. This
being done, the head of Galligantua was likewise, in the usual manner,
conveyed to the Court of King Arthur, where, the very next day, Jack
followed, with the knights and ladies who had been delivered.
Whereupon, as a reward for his good services, the king prevailed upon
the duke to bestow his daughter in marriage on honest Jack. So married
they were, and the whole kingdom was filled with joy at the wedding.
Furthermore, the king bestowed on Jack a noble castle, with a very
beautiful estate thereto belonging, where he and his lady lived in
great joy and happiness all the rest of their days.
Continue...

This complete e-book of English Fairy Tales, collected and edited by
Joseph Jacobs, is in the public domain.
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

At Amazon: The Golden Book of Fairy Tales

Page last updated on December 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
