




This book is the product of a long and as yet unsuccessful struggle that began 
when I read of Eric Eldred’s war to keep books free. Eldred’s work helped launch 
a movement, the free culture movement, and it is to him that this book is 
dedicated.
I received guidance in various places from friends and academics, including 
Glenn Brown, Peter DiCola, Jennifer Mnookin, Richard Posner, Mark Rose, and 
Kathleen Sullivan. And I received correction and guidance from many amazing 
students at Stanford Law School and Stanford University. They included Andrew B. 
Coan, John Eden, James P. Fellers, Christopher Guzelian, Erica Goldberg, Robert 
Hall- man, Andrew Harris, Matthew Kahn, Brian Link, Ohad Mayblum, Alina Ng, and 
Erica Platt. I am particularly grateful to Catherine Crump and Harry Surden, who 
helped direct their research, and to Laura Lynch, who brilliantly managed the 
army that they assembled, and provided her own critical eye on much of this.
Yuko Noguchi helped me to understand the laws of Japan as well as its culture. I 
am thankful to her, and to the many in Japan who helped me prepare this book: 
Joi Ito, Takayuki Matsutani, Naoto Misaki, Michihiro Sasaki, Hiromichi Tanaka, 
Hiroo Yamagata, and Yoshihiro Yonezawa. I am thankful as well as to Professor 
Nobuhiro Nakayama, and the Tokyo University Business Law Center, for giving me 
the chance to spend time in Japan, and to Tadashi Shiraishi and Kiyokazu 
Yamagami for their generous help while I was there.
These are the traditional sorts of help that academics regularly draw upon. But 
in addition to them, the Internet has made it possible to receive advice and 
correction from many whom I have never even met. Among those who have responded 
with extremely helpful advice to requests on my blog about the book are Dr. 
Mohammad Al-Ubaydli, David Gerstein, and Peter DiMauro, as well as a long list 
of those who had specific ideas about ways to develop my argument. They included 
Richard Bondi, Steven Cherry, David Coe, Nik Cubrilovic, Bob Devine, Charles 
Eicher, Thomas Guida, Elihu M. Gerson, Jeremy Hunsinger, Vaughn Iverson, John 
Karabaic, Jeff Keltner, James Lindenschmidt, K. L. Mann, Mark Manning, Nora 
McCauley, Jeffrey McHugh, Evan McMullen, Fred Norton, John Pormann, Pedro A. D. 
Rezende, Shabbir Safdar, Saul Schleimer, Clay Shirky, Adam Shostack, Kragen 
Sitaker, Chris Smith, Bruce Steinberg, Andrzej Jan Taramina, Sean Walsh, Matt 
Wasserman, Miljenko Williams, Wink, Roger Wood, Ximmbo da Jazz, and Richard 
Yanco. (I apologize if I have missed anyone; with computers come glitches, and a 
crash of my e-mail system meant I lost a bunch of great replies.)
Richard Stallman and Michael Carroll each read the whole book in draft, and each 
provided extremely helpful correction and advice. Michael helped me to see more 
clearly the significance of the regulation of derivitive works. And Richard 
corrected an embarrassingly large number of errors. While my work is in part 
inspired by Stallman’s, he does not agree with me in important places throughout 
this book.
Finally, and forever, I am thankful to Bettina, who has always insisted that 
there would be unending happiness away from these battles, and who has always 
been right. This slow learner is, as ever, grateful for her perpetual patience 
and love.
 

“Free Culture” by Lawrence Lessig is available for free under a Creative Commons license.
(You may redistribute, copy, or otherwise reuse/remix this book provided that you do so for non-commercial purposes and credit Professor Lessig.)
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Free Culture: The Nature and Future of CreativityBy Lawrence LessigAt Amazon
