Presented by
Authorama
Public Domain Books
Memoirs of the Court of Marie Antoinette, Queen of France
Being the Historic Memoirs of Madam Campan,
First Lady in Waiting to the Queen
Louis XVI. possessed an immense crowd of confidants, advisers, and
guides; he selected them even from among the factions which attacked him.
Never, perhaps, did he make a full disclosure to any one of them, and
certainly he spoke with sincerity, to but very few.  He invariably kept
the reins of all secret intrigues in his own hand; and thence, doubtless,
arose the want of cooperation and the weakness which were so conspicuous
in his measures.  From these causes considerable chasms will be found in
the detailed history of the Revolution.
In order to become thoroughly acquainted with the latter years of the
reign of Louis XV., memoirs written by the Duc de Choiseul, the Duc
d’Aiguillon, the Marechal de Richelieu,
     [I heard Le Marechal de Richelieu desire M. Campan, who was
     librarian to the Queen, not to buy the Memoirs which would certainly
     be attributed to him after his death, declaring them false by
     anticipation; and adding that he was ignorant of orthography, and
     had never amused himself with writing.  Shortly after the death of
     the Marshal, one Soulavie put forth Memoirs of the Marechal de
     Richelieu.]
and the Duc de La Vauguyon, should be before us.  To give us a faithful
portrait of the unfortunate reign of Louis XVI., the Marechal du Muy,
M. de Maurepas, M. de Vergennes, M. de Malesherbes, the Duc d’Orleans,
M. de La Fayette, the Abby de Vermond, the Abbe Montesquiou, Mirabeau,
the Duchesse de Polignac, and the Duchesse de Luynes should have noted
faithfully in writing all the transactions in which they took decided
parts.  The secret political history of a later period has been
disseminated among a much greater number of persons; there are Ministers
who have published memoirs, but only when they had their own measures to
justify, and then they confined themselves to the vindication of their
own characters, without which powerful motive they probably would have
written nothing.  In general, those nearest to the Sovereign, either by
birth or by office, have left no memoirs; and in absolute monarchies the
mainsprings of great events will be found in particulars which the most
exalted persons alone could know.  Those who have had but little under
their charge find no subject in it for a book; and those who have long
borne the burden of public business conceive themselves to be forbidden
by duty, or by respect for authority, to disclose all they know.  Others,
again, preserve notes, with the intention of reducing them to order when
they shall have reached the period of a happy leisure; vain illusion of
the ambitious, which they cherish, for the most part, but as a veil to
conceal from their sight the hateful image of their inevitable downfall!
and when it does at length take place, despair or chagrin deprives them
of fortitude to dwell upon the dazzling period which they never cease to
regret.
Louis XVI.  meant to write his own memoirs; the manner in which his
private papers were arranged indicated this design.  The Queen also had
the same intention; she long preserved a large correspondence, and a
great number of minute reports, made in the spirit and upon the event of
the moment.  But after the 20th of June, 1792, she was obliged to burn
the larger portion of what she had so collected, and the remainder were
conveyed out of France.
Considering the rank and situations of the persons I have named as
capable of elucidating by their writings the history of our political
storms, it will not be imagined that I aim at placing myself on a level
with them; but I have spent half my life either with the daughters of
Louis XV. or with Marie Antoinette.  I knew the characters of those
Princesses; I became privy to some extraordinary facts, the publication
of which may be interesting, and the truth of the details will form the
merit of my work.
I was very young when I was placed about the Princesses, the daughters of
Louis XV., in the capacity of reader.  I was acquainted with the Court of
Versailles before the time of the marriage of Louis XVI. with the
Archduchess Marie Antoinette.
My father, who was employed in the department of Foreign Affairs, enjoyed
the reputation due to his talents and to his useful labours.  He had
travelled much.  Frenchmen, on their return home from foreign countries,
bring with them a love for their own, increased in warmth; and no man was
more penetrated with this feeling, which ought to be the first virtue of
every placeman, than my father.  Men of high title, academicians, and
learned men, both natives and foreigners, sought my father’s
acquaintance, and were gratified by being admitted into his house.
Twenty years before the Revolution I often heard it remarked that the
imposing character of the power of Louis XIV. was no longer to be found
in the Palace of Versailles; that the institutions of the ancient
monarchy were rapidly sinking; and that the people, crushed beneath the
weight of taxes, were miserable, though silent; but that they began to
give ear to the bold speeches of the philosophers, who loudly proclaimed
their sufferings and their rights; and, in short, that the age would not
pass away without the occurrence of some great outburst, which would
unsettle France, and change the course of its progress.
Those who thus spoke were almost all partisans of M. Turgot’s system of
administration: they were Mirabeau the father, Doctor Quesnay, Abbe
Bandeau, and Abbe Nicoli, charge d’affaires to Leopold, Grand Duke of
Tuscany, and as enthusiastic an admirer of the maxims of the innovators
as his Sovereign.
My father sincerely respected the purity of intention of these
politicians.  With them he acknowledged many abuses in the Government;
but he did not give these political sectarians credit for the talent
necessary for conducting a judicious reform.  He told them frankly that
in the art of moving the great machine of Government, the wisest of them
was inferior to a good magistrate; and that if ever the helm of affairs
should be put into their hands, they would be speedily checked in the
execution of their schemes by the immeasurable difference existing
between the most brilliant theories and the simplest practice of
administration.
Destiny having formerly placed me near crowned heads, I now amuse my
solitude when in retirement with collecting a variety of facts which may
prove interesting to my family when I shall be no more.  The idea of
collecting all the interesting materials which my memory affords occurred
to me from reading the work entitled “Paris, Versailles, and the
Provinces in the Eighteenth Century.”  That work, composed by a man
accustomed to the best society, is full of piquant anecdotes, nearly all
of which have been recognised as true by the contemporaries of the
author.  I have put together all that concerned the domestic life of an
unfortunate Princess, whose reputation is not yet cleared of the stains
it received from the attacks of calumny, and who justly merited a
different lot in life, a different place in the opinion of mankind after
her fall.  These memoirs, which were finished ten years ago, have met
with the approbation of some persons; and my son may, perhaps, think
proper to print them after my decease.
J.  L.  H.  C.
–When Madame Campan wrote these lines, she did not anticipate that the
death of her son would precede her own.
MARIE ANTOINETTE.
MEMOIR OF MADAME CAMPAN.
JEANNE LOUISE HENRIETTE GENET was born in Paris on the 6th of October,
1752.  M. Genet, her father, had obtained, through his own merit and the
influence of the Duc de Choiseul, the place of first clerk in the Foreign
Office.
Literature, which he had cultivated in his youth, was often the solace of
his leisure hours.  Surrounded by a numerous family, he made the
instruction of his children his chief recreation, and omitted nothing
which was necessary to render them highly accomplished.  His clever and
precocious daughter Henriette was very early accustomed to enter society,
and to take an intelligent interest in current topics and public events.
Accordingly, many of her relations being connected with the Court or
holding official positions, she amassed a fund of interesting
recollections and characteristic anecdotes, some gathered from personal
experience, others handed down by old friends of the family.
“The first event which made any impression on me in my childhood,” she
says in her reminiscences, “was the attempt of Damiens to assassinate
Louis XV.  This occurrence struck me so forcibly that the most minute
details relating to the confusion and grief which prevailed at Versailles
on that day seem as present to my imagination as the most recent events.
I had dined with my father and mother, in company with one of their
friends.  The drawing-room was lighted up with a number of candles, and
four card-tables were already occupied, when a friend of the gentleman of
the house came in, with a pale and terrified countenance, and said, in a
voice scarcely audible, ’I bring you terrible news.  The King has been
assassinated!’  Two ladies in the company fainted; a brigadier of the
Body Guards threw down his cards and cried out, ’I do not wonder at it;
it is those rascally Jesuits.’–’What are you saying, brother?’ cried a
lady, flying to him; ’would you get yourself arrested?’–’Arrested!  For
what?  For unmasking those wretches who want a bigot for a King?’  My
father came in; he recommended circumspection, saying that the blow was
not mortal, and that all meetings ought to be suspended at so critical a
moment.  He had brought the chaise for my mother, who placed me on her
knees.  We lived in the Avenue de Paris, and throughout our drive I heard
incessant cries and sobs from the footpaths.
“At last I saw a man arrested; he was an usher of the King’s chamber, who
had gone mad, and was crying out, ’Yes, I know them; the wretches! the
villains!’  Our chaise was stopped by this bustle.  My mother recognised
the unfortunate man who had been seized; she gave his name to the trooper
who had stopped him.  The poor usher was therefore merely conducted to
the gens d’armes’ guardroom, which was then in the avenue.
“I have often heard M. de Landsmath, equerry and master of the hounds,
who used to come frequently to my father’s, say that on the news of the
attempt on the King’s life he instantly repaired to his Majesty.
I cannot repeat the coarse expressions he made use of to encourage his
Majesty; but his account of the affair, long afterwards, amused the
parties in which he was prevailed on to relate it, when all apprehensions
respecting the consequences of the event had subsided.  This M. de
Landsmath was an old soldier, who had given proofs of extraordinary
valour; nothing had been able to soften his manners or subdue his
excessive bluntness to the respectful customs of the Court.  The King was
very fond of him.  He possessed prodigious strength, and had often
contended with Marechal Saxe, renowned for his great bodily power, in
trying the strength of their respective wrists.
     [One day when the King was hunting in the forest of St. Germain,
     Landemath, riding before him, wanted a cart, filled with the slime
     of a pond that had just been cleansed, to draw up out of the way.
     The carter resisted, and even answered with impertinence.
     Landsmath, without dismounting, seized him by the breast of his
     coat, lifted him up, and threw him into his cart.–MADAME CAMPAN.
“M. de Landsmath had a thundering voice.  When he came into the King’s
apartment he found the Dauphin and Mesdames, his Majesty’s daughters,
there; the Princesses, in tears, surrounded the King’s bed.  Send out all
these weeping women, Sire,’ said the old equerry; ’I want to speak to you
alone: The King made a sign to the Princesses to withdraw.  ’Come,’ said
Landsmath, ’your wound is nothing; you had plenty of waistcoats and
flannels on.’  Then uncovering his breast, ’Look here,’ said he, showing
four or five great scars, ’these are something like wounds; I received
them thirty years ago; now cough as loud as you can.’  The King did so.
’’Tis nothing at all,’ said Landsmath; ’you must laugh at it; we shall
hunt a stag together in four days.’–’But suppose the blade was
poisoned,’ said the King.  ’Old grandams’ tales,’ replied Landsmath;
’if it had been so, the waistcoats and flannels would have rubbed the
poison off.’  The King was pacified, and passed a very good night.
“His Majesty one day asked M. de Landsmath how old he was.  He was aged,
and by no means fond of thinking of his age; he evaded the question.
A fortnight later, Louis XV. took a paper out of his pocket and read
aloud: ’On such a day in the month of one thousand six hundred and
eighty, was baptised by me, rector of –––, the son of the high and
mighty lord,’ etc.  ’What’s that?’ said Landsmath, angrily; ’has your
Majesty been procuring the certificate of my baptism?’–’There it is, you
see, Landsmath,’ said the King.  ’Well, Sire, hide it as fast as you can;
a prince entrusted with the happiness of twenty-five millions of people
ought not wilfully to hurt the feelings of a single individual.’
“The King learned that Landsmath had lost his confessor, a missionary
priest of the parish of Notre-Dame.  It was the custom of the Lazarists
to expose their dead with the face uncovered.  Louis XV. wished to try
his equerry’s firmness.  ’You have lost your confessor, I hear,’ said the
King.  ’Yes, Sire.’–’He will be exposed with his face bare?’–’Such is
the custom.’–’I command you to go and see him.’–’Sire, my confessor was
my friend; it would be very painful to me.’–’No matter; I command you.’
–’Are you really in earnest, Sire?’–’Quite so.’–’It would be the first
time in my life that I had disobeyed my sovereign’s order.  I will go.’
The next day the King at his levee, as soon as he perceived Landsmath,
said, ’Have you done as I desired you, Landsmath?’–’Undoubtedly, Sire.’
–’Well, what did you see?’–’Faith, I saw that your Majesty and I are no
great shakes!’
“At the death of Queen Maria Leczinska, M. Campan,–[Her father-in-law,
afterwards secretary to Marie Antoinette.]–then an officer of the
chamber, having performed several confidential duties, the King asked
Madame Adelaide how he should reward him.  She requested him to create an
office in his household of master of the wardrobe, with a salary of a
thousand crowns.  ’I will do so,’ said the King; ’it will be an
honourable title; but tell Campan not to add a single crown to his
expenses, for you will see they will never pay him.’
“Louis XV., by his dignified carriage, and the amiable yet majestic
expression of his features, was worthy to succeed to Louis the Great.
But he too frequently indulged in secret pleasures, which at last were
sure to become known.  During several winters, he was passionately fond
of ’candles’ end balls’, as he called those parties amongst the very
lowest classes of society.  He got intelligence of the picnics given by
the tradesmen, milliners, and sempstresses of Versailles, whither he
repaired in a black domino, and masked, accompanied by the captain of his
Guards, masked like himself.  His great delight was to go ’en brouette’–
[In a kind of sedan-chair, running on two wheels, and drawn by a
chairman.]–Care was always taken to give notice to five or six officers
of the King’s or Queen’s chamber to be there, in order that his Majesty
might be surrounded by people on whom he could depend, without finding it
troublesome.  Probably the captain of the Guards also took other
precautions of this description on his part.  My father-in-law, when the
King and he were both young, has often made one amongst the servants
desired to attend masked at these parties, assembled in some garret, or
parlour of a public-house.  In those times, during the carnival, masked
companies had a right to join the citizens’ balls; it was sufficient that
one of the party should unmask and name himself.
“These secret excursions, and his too habitual intercourse with ladies
more distinguished for their personal charms than for the advantages of
education, were no doubt the means by which the King acquired many vulgar
expressions which otherwise would never have reached his ears.
“Yet amidst the most shameful excesses the King sometimes suddenly
resumed the dignity of his rank in a very noble manner.  The familiar
courtiers of Louis XV. had one day abandoned themselves to the
unrestrained gaiety, of a supper, after returning from the chase.  Each
boasted of and described the beauty of his mistress.  Some of them amused
themselves with giving a particular account of their wives’ personal
defects.  An imprudent word, addressed to Louis XV., and applicable only
to the Queen, instantly dispelled all the mirth of the entertainment.
The King assumed his regal air, and knocking with his knife on the table
twice or thrice, ’Gentlemen; said he, ’here is the King!’
“Those men who are most completely abandoned to dissolute manners are
not, on that account, insensible to virtue in women.  The Comtesse de
Perigord was as beautiful as virtuous.  During some excursions she made
to Choisy, whither she had been invited, she perceived that the King took
great notice of her.  Her demeanour of chilling respect, her cautious
perseverance in shunning all serious conversation with the monarch, were
insufficient to extinguish this rising flame, and he at length addressed
a letter to her, worded in the most passionate terms.  This excellent
woman instantly formed her resolution: honour forbade her returning the
King’s passion, whilst her profound respect for the sovereign made her
unwilling to disturb his tranquillity.  She therefore voluntarily
banished herself to an estate she possessed called Chalais, near
Barbezieux, the mansion of which had been uninhabited nearly a century;
the porter’s lodge was the only place in a condition to receive her.
From this seat she wrote to his Majesty, explaining her motives for
leaving Court; and she remained there several years without visiting
Paris.  Louis XV. was speedily attracted by other objects, and regained
the composure to which Madame de Perigord had thought it her duty to
sacrifice so much.  Some years after, Mesdames’ lady of honour died.
Many great families solicited the place.  The King, without answering any
of their applications, wrote to the Comtesse de Perigord: ’My daughters
have just lost their lady of honour; this place, madame, is your due, as
much on account of your personal qualities as of the illustrious name of
your family.’
“Three young men of the college of St. Germain, who had just completed
their course of studies, knowing no person about the Court, and having
heard that strangers were always well treated there, resolved to dress
themselves completely in the Armenian costume, and, thus clad, to present
themselves to see the grand ceremony of the reception of several knights
of the Order of the Holy Ghost.  Their stratagem met with all the success
with which they had flattered themselves.  While the procession was
passing through the long mirror gallery, the Swiss of the apartments
placed them in the first row of spectators, recommending every one to pay
all possible attention to the strangers.  The latter, however, were
imprudent enough to enter the ’oeil-de-boeuf’ chamber, where, were
Messieurs Cardonne and Ruffin, interpreters of Oriental languages, and
the first clerk of the consul’s department, whose business it was to
attend to everything which related to the natives of the East who were in
France.  The three scholars were immediately surrounded and questioned by
these gentlemen, at first in modern Greek.  Without being disconcerted,
they made signs that they did not understand it.  They were then
addressed in Turkish and Arabic; at length one of the interpreters,
losing all patience, exclaimed, ’Gentlemen, you certainly must understand
some of the languages in which you have been addressed.  What country can
you possibly come from then?’–’From St. Germain-en-Laye, sir,’ replied
the boldest among them; ’this is the first time you have put the question
to us in French.’  They then confessed the motive of their disguise; the
eldest of them was not more than eighteen years of age.  Louis XV. was
informed of the affair.  He laughed heartily, ordered them a few hours’
confinement and a good admonition, after which they were to be set at
liberty.
“Louis XV. liked to talk about death, though he was extremely
apprehensive of it; but his excellent health and his royal dignity
probably made him imagine himself invulnerable.  He often said to people
who had very bad colds, ’You’ve a churchyard cough there.’  Hunting one
day in the forest of Senard, in a year in which bread was extremely dear,
he met a man on horseback carrying a coffin.  ’Whither are you carrying
that coffin?’–’To the village of –––,’ answered the peasant.  ’Is it
for a man or a woman?’–’For a man.’–’What did he die of?’–’Of hunger,’
bluntly replied the villager.  The King spurred on his horse, and asked
no more questions.
“Weak as Louis XV. was, the Parliaments would never have obtained his
consent to the convocation of the States General.  I heard an anecdote on
this subject from two officers attached to that Prince’s household.  It
was at the period when the remonstrances of the Parliaments, and the
refusals to register the decrees for levying taxes, produced alarm with
respect to the state of the finances.  This became the subject of
conversation one evening at the coucher of Louis XV.  ’You will see,
Sire,’ said a courtier, whose office placed him in close communication
with the King, ’that all this will make it absolutely necessary to
assemble the States General!’
“The King, roused by this speech from the habitual apathy of his
character, seized the courtier by the arm, and said to him, in a passion,
’Never repeat, these words.  I am not sanguinary; but had I a brother,
and were he to dare to give me such advice, I would sacrifice him, within
twenty-four hours, to the duration of the monarchy and the tranquillity
of the kingdom.’
“Several years prior to his death the Dauphin, the father of Louis XVI.,
had confluent smallpox, which endangered his life; and after his
convalescence he was long troubled with a malignant ulcer under the nose.
He was injudiciously advised to get rid of it by the use of extract of
lead, which proved effectual; but from that time the Dauphin, who was
corpulent, insensibly grew thin, and a short, dry cough evinced that the
humour, driven in, had fallen on the lungs.  Some persons also suspected
him of having taken acids in too great a quantity for the purpose of
reducing his bulk.  The state of his health was not, however, such as to
excite alarm.  At the camp at Compiegne, in July, 1764, the Dauphin
reviewed the troops, and evinced much activity in the performance of his
duties; it was even observed that he was seeking to gain the attachment
of the army.  He presented the Dauphiness to the soldiers, saying, with a
simplicity which at that time made a great sensation, ’Mes enfans, here
is my wife.’  Returning late on horseback to Compiegne, he found he had
taken a chill; the heat of the day had been excessive; the Prince’s
clothes had been wet with perspiration.  An illness followed, in which
the Prince began to spit blood.  His principal physician wished to have
him bled; the consulting physicians insisted on purgation, and their
advice was followed.  The pleurisy, being ill cured, assumed and retained
all the symptoms of consumption; the Dauphin languished from that period
until December, 1765, and died at Fontainebleau, where the Court, on
account of his condition, had prolonged its stay, which usually ended on
the 2d of November.
“The Dauphiness, his widow, was deeply afflicted; but the immoderate
despair which characterised her grief induced many to suspect that the
loss of the crown was an important part of the calamity she lamented.
She long refused to eat enough to support life; she encouraged her tears
to flow by placing portraits of the Dauphin in every retired part of her
apartments.  She had him represented pale, and ready to expire, in a
picture placed at the foot of her bed, under draperies of gray cloth,
with which the chambers of the Princesses were always hung in court
mournings.  Their grand cabinet was hung with black cloth, with an
alcove, a canopy, and a throne, on which they received compliments of
condolence after the first period of the deep mourning.  The Dauphiness,
some months before the end of her career, regretted her conduct in
abridging it; but it was too late; the fatal blow had been struck.  It
may also be presumed that living with a consumptive, man had contributed
to her complaint.  This Princess had no opportunity of displaying her
qualities; living in a Court in which she was eclipsed by the King and
Queen, the only characteristics that could be remarked in her were her
extreme attachment to her husband, and her great piety.
“The Dauphin was little known, and his character has been much mistaken.
He himself, as he confessed to his intimate friends, sought to disguise
it.  He one day asked one of his most familiar servants, ’What do they
say in Paris of that great fool of a Dauphin?’ The person interrogated
seeming confused, the Dauphin urged him to express himself sincerely,
saying, ’Speak freely; that is positively the idea which I wish people to
form of me.’
“As he died of a disease which allows the last moment to be anticipated
long beforehand, he wrote much, and transmitted his affections and his
prejudices to his son by secret notes.
“Madame de Pompadour’s brother received Letters of Nobility from his
Majesty, and was appointed superintendent of the buildings and gardens.
He often presented to her Majesty, through the medium of his sister, the
rarest flowers, pineapples, and early vegetables from the gardens of
Trianon and Choisy.  One day, when the Marquise came into the Queen’s
apartments, carrying a large basket of flowers, which she held in her two
beautiful arms, without gloves, as a mark of respect, the Queen loudly
declared her admiration of her beauty; and seemed as if she wished to
defend the King’s choice, by praising her various charms in detail, in a
manner that would have been as suitable to a production of the fine arts
as to a living being.  After applauding the complexion, eyes, and fine
arms of the favourite, with that haughty condescension which renders
approbation more offensive than flattering, the Queen at length requested
her to sing, in the attitude in which she stood, being desirous of
hearing the voice and musical talent by which the King’s Court had been
charmed in the performances of the private apartments, and thus combining
the gratification of the ears with that of the eyes.  The Marquise, who
still held her enormous basket, was perfectly sensible of something
offensive in this request, and tried to excuse herself from singing.  The
Queen at last commanded her; she then exerted her fine voice in the solo
of Armida–’At length he is in my power.’ The change in her Majesty’s
countenance was so obvious that the ladies present at this scene had the
greatest difficulty to keep theirs.
“The Queen was affable and modest; but the more she was thankful in her
heart to Heaven for having placed her on the first throne in Europe, the
more unwilling she was to be reminded of her elevation.  This sentiment
induced her to insist on the observation of all the forms of respect due
to royal birth; whereas in other princes the consciousness of that birth
often induces them to disdain the ceremonies of etiquette, and to prefer
habits of ease and simplicity.  There was a striking contrast in this
respect between Maria Leczinska and Marie Antoinette, as has been justly
and generally observed.  The latter unfortunate Queen, perhaps, carried
her disregard of everything belonging to the strict forms of etiquette
too far.  One day, when the Marechale de Mouchy was teasing her with
questions relative to the extent to which she would allow the ladies the
option of taking off or wearing their cloaks, and of pinning up the
lappets of their caps, or letting them hang down, the Queen replied to
her, in my presence: ’Arrange all those matters, madame, just as you
please; but do not imagine that a queen, born Archduchess of Austria, can
attach that importance to them which might be felt by a Polish princess
who had become Queen of France.’
“The virtues and information of the great are always evinced by their
conduct; their accomplishments, coming within the scope of flattery, are
difficult to be ascertained by any authentic proofs, and those who have
lived near them may be excused for some degree of scepticism with regard
to their attainments of this kind.  If they draw or paint, there is
always an able artist present, who, if he does not absolutely guide the
pencil with his own hand, directs it by his advice.  If a princess
attempt a piece of embroidery in colours, of that description which ranks
amongst the productions of the arts, a skilful embroideress is employed
to undo and repair whatever has been spoilt.  If the princess be a
musician, there are no ears that will discover when she is out of tune;
at least there is no tongue that will tell her so.  This imperfection in
the accomplishments of the great is but a slight misfortune.  It is
sufficiently meritorious in them to engage in such pursuits, even with
indifferent success, because this taste and the protection it extends
produce abundance of talent on every side.  Maria Leczinska delighted in
the art of painting, and imagined she herself could draw and paint.  She
had a drawing-master, who passed all his time in her cabinet.  She
undertook to paint four large Chinese pictures, with which she wished to
ornament her private drawing-room, which was richly furnished with rare
porcelain and the finest marbles.  This painter was entrusted with the
landscape and background of the pictures; he drew the figures with a
pencil; the faces and arms were also left by the Queen to his execution;
she reserved to herself nothing but the draperies, and the least
important accessories.  The Queen every morning filled up the outline
marked out for her, with a little red, blue, or green colour, which the
master prepared on the palette, and even filled her brush with,
constantly repeating, ’Higher up, Madame–lower down, Madame–a little to
the right–more to the left.’ After an hour’s work, the time for hearing
mass, or some other family or pious duty, would interrupt her Majesty;
and the painter, putting the shadows into the draperies she had painted,
softening off the colour where she had laid too much, etc., finished the
small figures.  When the work was completed the private drawing-room was
decorated with her Majesty’s work; and the firm persuasion of this good
Queen that she had painted it herself was so entire that she left this
cabinet, with all its furniture and paintings, to the Comtesse de
Noailles, her lady of honour.  She added to the bequest: ’The pictures in
my cabinet being my own work, I hope the Comtesse de Noailles will
preserve them for my sake.’  Madame de Noailles, afterwards Marechale de
Mouchy, had a new pavilion constructed in her hotel in the Faubourg St.
Germain, in order to form a suitable receptacle for the Queen’s legacy;
and had the following inscription placed over the door, in letters of
gold: ’The innocent falsehood of a good princess.’
“Maria Leczinska could never look with cordiality on the Princess of
Saxony, who married the Dauphin; but the attentive behaviour of the
Dauphiness at length made her Majesty forget that the Princess was the
daughter of a king who wore her father’s crown.  Nevertheless, although
the Queen now saw in the Princess of Saxony only a wife beloved by her
son, she never could forget that Augustus wore the crown of Stanislaus.
One day an officer of her chamber having undertaken to ask a private
audience of her for the Saxon minister, and the Queen being unwilling to
grant it, he ventured to add that he should not have presumed to ask this
favour of the Queen had not the minister been the ambassador of a member
of the family.  ’Say of an enemy of the family,’ replied the Queen,
angrily; ’and let him come in.’
“Comte de Tesse, father of the last Count of that name, who left no
children, was first equerry to Queen Maria Leczinska.  She esteemed his
virtues, but often diverted herself at the expense of his simplicity.
One day, when the conversation turned on the noble military, actions by
which the French nobility was distinguished, the Queen said to the Count:
’And your family, M. de Tesse, has been famous, too, in the field.’–
’Ah, Madame, we have all been killed in our masters’ service!’–’How
rejoiced I am,’ replied the Queen, ’that you have revived to tell me of
it.’  The son of this worthy M. de Tesse was married to the amiable and
highly gifted daughter of the Duc d’Ayen, afterwards Marechale de
Noailles.  He was exceedingly fond of his daughter-in-law, and never
could speak of her without emotion.  The Queen, to please him, often
talked to him about the young Countess, and one day asked him which of
her good qualities seemed to him most conspicuous.  ’Her gentleness,
Madame, her gentleness,’ said he, with tears in his eyes; ’she is so
mild, so soft,–as soft as a good carriage.’–’Well,’ said her Majesty,
’that’s an excellent comparison for a first equerry.’
“In 1730 Queen Maria Leczinska, going to mass, met old Marechal Villars,
leaning on a wooden crutch not worth fifteen pence.  She rallied him
about it, and the Marshal told her that he had used it ever since he had
received a wound which obliged him to add this article to the equipments
of the army.  Her Majesty, smiling, said she thought this crutch so
unworthy of him that she hoped to induce him to give it up.  On returning
home she despatched M. Campan to Paris with orders to purchase at the
celebrated Germain’s the handsomest cane, with a gold enamelled crutch,
that he could find, and carry it without delay to Mardchal Villars’s
hotel, and present it to him from her.  He was announced accordingly, and
fulfilled his commission.  The Marshal, in attending him to the door,
requested him to express his gratitude to the Queen, and said that he had
nothing fit to offer to an officer who had the honour to belong to her
Majesty; but he begged him to accept of his old stick, saying that his
grandchildren would probably some day be glad to possess the cane with
which he had commanded at Marchiennes and Denain.  The known frugality of
Marechal Villars appears in this anecdote; but he was not mistaken with
respect to the estimation in which his stick would be held.  It was
thenceforth kept with veneration by M. Campan’s family.  On the 10th of
August, 1792, a house which I occupied on the Carrousel, at the entrance
of the Court of the Tuileries, was pillaged and nearly burnt down.  The
cane of Marechal Villars was thrown into the Carrousel as of no value,
and picked up by my servant.  Had its old master been living at that
period we should not have witnessed such a deplorable day.
“Before the Revolution there were customs and words in use at Versailles
with which few people were acquainted.  The King’s dinner was called
’The King’s meat.’  Two of the Body Guard accompanied the attendants who
carried the dinner; every one rose as they passed through the halls,
saying, ’There is the King’s meat.’  All precautionary duties were
distinguished by the words ’in case.’  One of the guards might be heard
to say, ’I am in case in the forest of St. Germain.’  In the evening they
always brought the Queen a large bowl of broth, a cold roast fowl, one
bottle of wine, one of orgeat, one of lemonade, and some other articles,
which were called the ’in case’ for the night.  An old medical gentleman,
who had been physician in ordinary to Louis XIV., and was still living at
the time of the marriage of Louis XV., told M. Campan’s father an
anecdote which seems too remarkable to have remained unknown;
nevertheless he was a man of honour, incapable of inventing this story.
His name was Lafosse.  He said that Louis XIV. was informed that the
officers of his table evinced, in the most disdainful and offensive
manner, the mortification they felt at being obliged to eat at the table
of the comptroller of the kitchen along with Moliere, valet de chambre to
his Majesty, because Moliere had performed on the stage; and that this
celebrated author consequently declined appearing at that table.  Louis
XIV., determined to put an end to insults which ought never to have been
offered to one of the greatest geniuses of the age, said to him one
morning at the hour of his private levee, ’They say you live very poorly
here, Moliere; and that the officers of my chamber do not find you good
enough to eat with them.  Perhaps you are hungry; for my part I awoke
with a very good appetite this morning: sit down at this table.  Serve up
my ’in case’ for the night there.’  The King, then cutting up his fowl,
and ordering Moliere to sit down, helped him to a wing, at the same time
taking one for himself, and ordered the persons entitled to familiar
entrance, that is to say the most distinguished and favourite people at
Court, to be admitted.  ’You see me,’ said the King to them, ’engaged in
entertaining Moliere, whom my valets de chambre do not consider
sufficiently good company for them.’  From that time Moliere never had
occasion to appear at the valets’ table; the whole Court was forward
enough to send him invitations.
“M. de Lafosse used also to relate that a brigade-major of the Body
Guard, being ordered to place the company in the little theatre at
Versailles, very roughly turned out one of the King’s comptrollers who
had taken his seat on one of the benches, a place to which his newly
acquired office entitled him.  In vain he insisted on his quality and his
right.  The altercation was ended by the brigade-major in these words:
’Gentlemen Body Guards, do your duty.’  In this case their duty was to
turn the offender out at the door.  This comptroller, who had paid sixty
or eighty thousand francs for his appointment, was a man of a good
family, and had had the honour of serving his Majesty five and twenty
years in one of his regiments; thus ignominiously driven out of the hall,
he placed himself in the King’s way in the great hall of the Guards, and,
bowing to his Majesty, requested him to vindicate the honour of an old
soldier who had wished to end his days in his Prince’s civil employment,
now that age had obliged him to relinquish his military service.  The
King stopped, heard his story, and then ordered him to follow him.  His
Majesty attended the representation in a sort of amphitheatre, in which
his armchair was placed; behind him was a row of stools for the captain
of the Guards, the first gentleman of the chamber, and other great
officers.  The brigade-major was entitled to one of these places; the
King stopped opposite the seat which ought to have been occupied by that
officer and said to the comptroller, ’Take, monsieur, for this evening,
the place near my person of him who has offended you, and let the
expression of my displeasure at this unjust affront satisfy you instead
of any other reparation:
“During the latter years of the reign of Louis XIV. he never went out but
in a chair carried by porters, and he showed a great regard for a man
named D’Aigremont, one of those porters who always went in front and
opened the door of the chair.  The slightest preference shown by
sovereigns, even to the meanest of their servants, never fails to excite
observation.
     [People of the very first rank did not disdain to descend to the
     level of D’Aigremont.  “Lauzun,” said the Duchesse d’Orleans in her
     “Memoirs,” “sometimes affects stupidity in order to show people
     their own with impunity, for he is very malicious.  In order to make
     Marechal de Tease feel the impropriety of his familiarity with
     people of the common sort, he called out, in the drawing-room at
     Marly, ’Marechal, give me a pinch of snuff; some of your best, such
     as you take in the morning with Monsieur d’Aigremont, the
     chairman.’"–NOTE BY THE EDITOR.]
The King had done something for this man’s numerous family, and
frequently talked to him.  An abbe belonging to the chapel thought proper
to request D’Aigremont to present a memorial to the King, in which he
requested his Majesty to grant him a benefice.  Louis XIV.  did not
approve of the liberty thus taken by his chairman, and said to him, in a
very angry tone, ’D’Aigremont, you have been made to do a very unbecoming
act, and I am sure there must be simony in the case.’–’No, Sire, there
is not the least ceremony in the case, I assure you,’ answered the poor
man, in great consternation; ’the abbe only said he would give me a
hundred Louis.’–’D’Aigremont,’ said the King, ’I forgive you on account
of your ignorance and candour.  I will give you the hundred Louis out of
my privy purse; but I will discharge you the very next time you venture
to present a memorial to me.’
“Louis XIV. was very kind to those of his servants who were nearest his
person; but the moment he assumed his royal deportment, those who were
most accustomed to see him in his domestic character were as much
intimidated as if they were appearing in his presence for the first time
in their lives.  Some of the members of his Majesty’s civil household,
then called ’commensalite’, enjoying the title of equerry, and the
privileges attached to officers of the King’s household, had occasion to
claim some prerogatives, the exercise of which the municipal body of St.
Germain, where they resided, disputed with them.  Being assembled in
considerable numbers in that town, they obtained the consent of the
minister of the household to allow them to send a deputation to the King;
and for that purpose chose from amongst them two of his Majesty’s valets
de chambre named Bazire and Soulaigre.  The King’s levee being over, the
deputation of the inhabitants of the town of St. Germain was called in.
They entered with confidence; the King looked at them, and assumed his
imposing attitude.  Bazire, one of these valets de chambre, was about to
speak, but Louis the Great was looking on him.  He no longer saw the
Prince he was accustomed to attend at home; he was intimidated, and could
not find words; he recovered, however, and began as usual with the word
Sire.  But timidity again overpowered him, and finding himself unable to
recollect the slightest particle of what he came to say, he repeated the
word Sire several times, and at length concluded by paying, ’Sire, here
is Soulaigre.’  Soulaigre, who was very angry with Bazire, and expected
to acquit himself much better, then began to speak; but he also, after
repeating ’Sire’ several times, found his embarrassment increasing upon
him, until his confusion equalled that of his colleague; he therefore
ended with ’Sire, here is Bazire.’  The King smiled, and answered,
’Gentlemen, I have been informed of the business upon which you have been
deputed to wait on me, and I will take care that what is right shall be
done.  I am highly satisfied with the manner in which you have fulfilled
your functions as deputies.’”
Mademoiselle Genet’s education was the object of her father’s particular
attention.  Her progress in the study of music and of foreign languages
was surprising; Albaneze instructed her in singing, and Goldoni taught
her Italian.  Tasso, Milton, Dante, and even Shakespeare, soon became
familiar to her.  But her studies were particularly directed to the
acquisition of a correct and elegant style of reading.  Rochon de
Chabannes, Duclos, Barthe, Marmontel, and Thomas took pleasure in hearing
her recite the finest scenes of Racine.  Her memory and genius at the age
of fourteen charmed them; they talked of her talents in society, and
perhaps applauded them too highly.
She was soon spoken of at Court.  Some ladies of high rank, who took an
interest in the welfare of her family, obtained for her the place of
Reader to the Princesses.  Her presentation, and the circumstances which
preceded it, left a strong impression on her mind.  “I was then fifteen,"
she says; “my father felt some regret at yielding me up at so early an
age to the jealousies of the Court.  The day on which I first put on my
Court dress, and went to embrace him in his study, tears filled his eyes,
and mingled with the expression of his pleasure.  I possessed some
agreeable talents, in addition to the instruction which it had been his
delight to bestow on me.  He enumerated all my little accomplishments, to
convince me of the vexations they would not fail to draw upon me.”
Mademoiselle Genet, at fifteen, was naturally less of a philosopher than
her father was at forty.  Her eyes were dazzled by the splendour which
glittered at Versailles.  “The Queen, Maria Leczinska, the wife of Louis
XV., died,” she says, “just before I was presented at Court.  The grand
apartments hung with black, the great chairs of state, raised on several
steps, and surmounted by a canopy adorned with Plumes; the caparisoned
horses, the immense retinue in Court mourning, the enormous shoulder-
knots, embroidered with gold and silver spangles, which decorated the
coats of the pages and footmen,–all this magnificence had such an effect
on my senses that I could scarcely support myself when introduced to the
Princesses.  The first day of my reading in the inner apartment of Madame
Victoire I found it impossible to pronounce more than two sentences; my
heart palpitated, my voice faltered, and my sight failed.  How well
understood was the potent magic of the grandeur and dignity which ought
to surround sovereigns!  Marie Antoinette, dressed in white, with a plain
straw hat, and a little switch in her hand, walking on foot, followed by
a single servant, through the walks leading to the Petit Trianon, would
never have thus disconcerted me; and I believe this extreme simplicity
was the first and only real mistake of all those with which she is
reproached.”
When once her awe and confusion had subsided, Mademoiselle Genet was
enabled to form a more accurate judgment of her situation.  It was by no
means attractive; the Court of the Princesses, far removed from the
revels to which Louie XV. was addicted, was grave, methodical, and dull.
Madame Adelaide, the eldest of the Princesses, lived secluded in the
interior of her apartments; Madame Sophie was haughty; Madame Louise a
devotee.  Mademoiselle Genet never quitted the Princesses’ apartments;
but she attached herself most particularly to Madame Victoire.  This
Princess had possessed beauty; her countenance bore an expression of
benevolence, and her conversation was kind, free, and unaffected.  The
young reader excited in her that feeling which a woman in years, of an
affectionate disposition, readily extends to young people who are growing
up in her sight, and who possess some useful talents.  Whole days were
passed in reading to the Princess, as she sat at work in her apartment.
Mademoiselle Genet frequently saw there Louis XV., of whom she has
related the following anecdote:
“One day, at the Chateau of Compiegne, the King came in whilst I was
reading to Madame.  I rose and went into another room.  Alone, in an
apartment from which there was no outlet, with no book but a Massillon,
which I had been reading to the Princess, happy in all the lightness and
gaiety of fifteen, I amused myself with turning swiftly round, with my
court hoop, and suddenly kneeling down to see my rose-coloured silk
petticoat swelled around me by the wind.  In the midst of this grave
employment enters his Majesty, followed by one of the Princesses.  I
attempt to rise; my feet stumble, and down I fall in the midst of my
robes, puffed out by the wind.  ’Daughter,’ said Louis XV., laughing
heartily, ’I advise you to send back to school a reader who makes
cheeses.’”  The railleries of Louis XV. were often much more cutting,
as Mademoiselle Genet experienced on another occasion, which, thirty
years afterwards, she could not relate without an emotion of fear.
"Louis XV.,” she said, “had the most imposing presence.  His eyes
remained fixed upon you all the time he was speaking; and,
notwithstanding the beauty of his features, he inspired a sort of fear.
I was very young, it is true, when he first spoke to me; you shall judge
whether it was in a very gracious manner.  I was fifteen.  The King was
going out to hunt, and a numerous retinue followed him.  As he stopped
opposite me he said, ’Mademoiselle Genet, I am assured you are very
learned, and understand four or five foreign languages.’–’I know only
two, Sire,’ I answered, trembling.  ’Which are they?’ English and
Italian.’–’Do you speak them fluently?’ Yes, Sire, very fluently.’
’That is quite enough to drive a husband mad.’  After this pretty
compliment the King went on; the retinue saluted me, laughing; and, for
my part, I remained for some moments motionless with surprise and
confusion.”
At the time when the French alliance was proposed by the Duc de Choiseul
there was at Vienna a doctor named Gassner,–[Jean Joseph Gassner, a
pretender to miraculous powers.]–who had fled thither to seek an asylum
against the persecutions of his sovereign, one of the ecclesiastical
electors.  Gassner, gifted with an extraordinary warmth of imagination,
imagined that he received inspirations.  The Empress protected him, saw
him occasionally, rallied him on his visions, and, nevertheless, heard
them with a sort of interest.  “Tell me,"–said she to him one day,
"whether my Antoinette will be happy.”  Gassner turned pale, and remained
silent.  Being still pressed by the Empress, and wishing to give a
general expression to the idea with which he seemed deeply occupied,
"Madame,” he replied, “there are crosses for all shoulders.”
The occurrences at the Place Louis XV. on the marriage festivities at
Paris are generally known.  The conflagration of the scaffolds intended
for the fireworks, the want of foresight of the authorities, the avidity
of robbers, the murderous career of the coaches, brought about and
aggravated the disasters of that day; and the young Dauphiness, coming
from Versailles, by the Cours la Reine, elated with joy, brilliantly
decorated, and eager to witness the rejoicings of the whole people, fled,
struck with consternation and drowned in tears, from the dreadful scene.
This tragic opening of the young Princess’s life in France seemed to bear
out Gassner’s hint of disaster, and to be ominous of the terrible future
which awaited her.
In the same year in which Marie Antoinette was married to the Dauphin,
Henriette Genet married a son of M. Campan, already mentioned as holding
an office at the Court; and when the household of the Dauphiness was
formed, Madame Campan was appointed her reader, and received from Marie
Antoinette a consistent kindness and confidence to which by her loyal
service she was fully entitled.   Madame Campan’s intelligence and
vivacity made her much more sympathetic to a young princess, gay and
affectionate in disposition, and reared in the simplicity of a German
Court, than her lady of honour, the Comtesse de Noailles.  This
respectable lady, who was placed near her as a minister of the laws of
etiquette, instead of alleviating their weight, rendered their yoke
intolerable to her.
“Madame de Noailles,” says Madame Campan, “abounded in virtues.  Her
piety, charity, and irreproachable morals rendered her worthy of praise;
but etiquette was to her a sort of atmosphere; at the slightest
derangement of the consecrated order, one would have thought the
principles of life would forsake her frame.
“One day I unintentionally threw this poor lady into a terrible agony.
The Queen was receiving I know not whom,–some persons just presented, I
believe; the lady of honour, the Queen’s tirewoman, and the ladies of the
bedchamber, were behind the Queen.  I was near the throne, with the two
women on duty.  All was right,–at least I thought so.  Suddenly I
perceived the eyes of Madame de Noailles fixed on mine.  She made a sign
with her head, and then raised her eyebrows to the top of her forehead,
lowered them, raised them again, then began to make little signs with her
hand.  From all this pantomime, I could easily perceive that something
was not as it should be; and as I looked about on all sides to find out
what it was, the agitation of the Countess kept increasing.  The Queen,
who perceived all this, looked at me with a smile; I found means to
approach her Majesty, who said to me in a whisper, ’Let down your
lappets, or the Countess will expire.’  All this bustle arose from two
unlucky pins which fastened up my lappets, whilst the etiquette of
costume said ’Lappets hanging down.’”
Her contempt of the vanities of etiquette became the pretext for the
first reproaches levelled at the Queen.  What misconduct might not be
dreaded from a princess who could absolutely go out without a hoop! and
who, in the salons of Trianon, instead of discussing the important rights
to chairs and stools, good-naturedly invited everybody to be seated.
     [M. de Fresne Forget, being one day in company with the Queen
     Marguerite, told her he was astonished how men and women with such
     great ruffs could eat soup without spoiling them; and still more how
     the ladies could be gallant with their great fardingales.  The Queen
     made no answer at that time, but a few days after, having a very
     large ruff on, and some ’bouili’ to eat, she ordered a very long
     spoon to be brought, and ate her ’bouili’ with it, without soiling
     her ruff.  Upon which, addressing herself to M. de Fresne, she said,
     laughing, “There now, you see, with a little ingenuity one may
     manage anything."–"Yes, faith, madame,” said the good man, “as far
     as regards the soup I am satisfied."–LAPLACE’s “Collection,” vol.
     ii., p. 350.]
The anti-Austrian party, discontented and vindictive, became spies upon
her conduct, exaggerated her slightest errors, and calumniated her most
innocent proceedings.  “What seems unaccountable at the first glance,"
says Montjoie, “is that the first attack on the reputation of the Queen
proceeded from the bosom of the Court.  What interest could the courtiers
have in seeking her destruction, which involved that of the King?  Was it
not drying up the source of all the advantages they enjoyed, or could
hope for?”
     [Madame Campan relates the following among many anecdotes
     illustrative of the Queen’s kindness of heart: “A petition was
     addressed to the Queen by a corporation in the neighbourhood of
     Paris, praying for the destruction of the game which destroyed their
     crops.  I was the bearer of this petition to her Majesty, who said,
     ’I will undertake to have these good people relieved from so great
     an annoyance.’  She gave the document to M. de Vermond in my
     presence, saying, ’I desire that immediate justice be done to this
     petition.’  An assurance was given that her order should be attended
     to, but six weeks afterwards a second petition was sent up, for the
     nuisance had not been abated after all.  If the second petition had
     reached the Queen, M. de Vermond would have received a sharp
     reprimand.  She was always so happy when it was in her power to do
     good.”
     The quick repartee, which was another of the Queen’s
     characteristics, was less likely to promote her popularity.  “M.
     Brunier,” says Madame Campan, “was physician to the royal children.
     During his visits to the palace, if the death of any of his patients
     was alluded to, he never failed to say, ’Ah! there I lost one of my
     best friends!  ’Well,’ said the Queen, ’if he loses all his patients
     who are his friends, what will become of those who are not?’"]
When the terrible Danton exclaimed, “The kings of Europe menace us; it
behooves us to defy them; let us throw down to them the head of a king as
our gage!” these detestable words, followed by so cruel a result, formed,
however, a formidable stroke of policy.  But the Queen!  What urgent
reasons of state could Danton, Collot d’Herbois, and Robespierre allege
against her?  What savage greatness did they discover in stirring up a
whole nation to avenge their quarrel on a woman?  What remained of her
former power?  She was a captive, a widow, trembling for her children!
In those judges, who at once outraged modesty and nature; in that people
whose vilest scoffs pursued her to the scaffold, who could have
recognised the generous people of France?  Of all the crimes which
disgraced the Revolution, none was more calculated to show how the spirit
of party can degrade the character of a nation.
The news of this dreadful event reached Madame Campan in an obscure
retreat which she had chosen.  She had not succeeded in her endeavours to
share the Queen’s captivity, and she expected every moment a similar
fate.  After escaping, almost miraculously, from the murderous fury of
the Marseillais; after being denounced and pursued by Robespierre, and
entrusted, through the confidence of the King and Queen, with papers of
the utmost importance, Madame Campan went to Coubertin, in the valley of
Chevreuse.  Madame Auguid, her sister, had just committed suicide, at the
very moment of her arrest.
     [Maternal affection prevailed over her religious sentiments; she
     wished to preserve the wreck of her fortune for her children.  Had
     she deferred this fatal act for one day she would have been saved;
     the cart which conveyed Robespierre to execution stopped her funeral
     procession!]
The scaffold awaited Madame Campan, when the 9th of Thermidor restored
her to life; but did not restore to her the most constant object of her
thoughts, her zeal, and her devotion.
A new career now opened to Madame Campan.  At Coubertin, surrounded by
her nieces, she was fond of directing their studies.  This occupation
caused her ideas to revert to the subject of education, and awakened once
more the inclinations of her youth.  At the age of twelve years she could
never meet a school of young ladies passing through the streets without
feeling ambitious of the situation and authority of their mistress.  Her
abode at Court had diverted but not altered her inclinations.  “A month
after the fall of Robespierre,” she says, “I considered as to the means
of providing for myself, for a mother seventy years of age, my sick
husband, my child nine years old, and part of my ruined family.  I now
possessed nothing in the world but an assignat of five hundred francs.
I had become responsible for my husband’s debts, to the amount of thirty
thousand francs.  I chose St. Germain to set up a boarding-school, for
that town did not remind me, as Versailles did, both of happy times and
of the misfortunes of France.  I took with me a nun of l’Enfant-Jesus, to
give an unquestionable pledge of my religious principles.  The school of
St. Germain was the first in which the opening of an oratory was ventured
on.  The Directory was displeased at it, and ordered it to be immediately
shut up; and some time after commissioners were sent to desire that the
reading of the Scriptures should be suppressed in my school.  I inquired
what books were to be substituted in their stead.  After some minutes’
conversation, they observed: ’Citizeness, you are arguing after the old
fashion; no reflections.  The nation commands; we must have obedience,
and no reasoning.’  Not having the means of printing my prospectus, I
wrote a hundred copies of it, and sent them to the persons of my
acquaintance who had survived the dreadful commotions.  At the year’s end
I had sixty pupils; soon afterwards a hundred.  I bought furniture and
paid my debts.”
The rapid success of the establishment at St. Germain was undoubtedly
owing to the talents, experience, and excellent principles of Madame
Campan, seconded by public opinion.  All property had changed hands; all
ranks found themselves confusedly jumbled by the shock of the Revolution:
the grand seigneur dined at the table of the opulent contractor; and the
witty and elegant marquise was present at the ball by the side of the
clumsy peasant lately grown rich.  In the absence of the ancient
distinctions, elegant manners and polished language now formed a kind of
aristocracy.  The house of St. Germain, conducted by a lady who possessed
the deportment and the habits of the best society, was not only a school
of knowledge, but a school of the world.
“A friend of Madame de Beauharnais,” continues Madame Campan, “brought me
her daughter Hortense de Beauharnais, and her niece Emilie de
Beauharnais.  Six months afterwards she came to inform me of her marriage
with a Corsican gentleman, who had been brought up in the military
school, and was then a general.  I was requested to communicate this
information to her daughter, who long lamented her mother’s change of
name.  I was also desired to watch over the education of little Eugene de
Beauharnais, who was placed at St. Germain, in the same school with my
son.
“A great intimacy sprang up between my nieces and these young people.
Madame de Beauharnaias set out for Italy, and left her children with me.
On her return, after the conquests of Bonaparte, that general, much
pleased with the improvement of his stepdaughter, invited me to dine at
Malmaison, and attended two representations of ’Esther’ at my school.”
He also showed his appreciation of her talents by sending his sister
Caroline to St. Germain.  Shortly before Caroline’s marriage to Murat,
and while she was yet at St. Germain, Napoleon observed to Madame Campan:
"I do not like those love matches between young people whose brains are
excited by the flames of the imagination.  I had other views for my
sister.  Who knows what high alliance I might have procured for her!  She
is thoughtless, and does not form a just notion of my situation.  The
time will come when, perhaps, sovereigns might dispute for her hand.  She
is about to marry a brave man; but in my situation that is not enough.
Fate should be left to fulfil her decrees.”
     [Madame Murat one day said to Madame Campan: “I am astonished that
     you are not more awed in our presence; you speak to us with as much
     familiarity as when we were your pupils!"–"The best thing you can
     do,” replied Madame Campan, “is to forget your titles when you are
     with me, for I can never be afraid of queens whom I have held under
     the rod."]
Madame Campan dined at the Tuileries in company with the Pope’s nuncio,
at the period when the Concordat was in agitation.  During dinner the
First Consul astonished her by the able manner in which he conversed on
the subject under discussion.  She said he argued so logically that his
talent quite amazed her.  During the consulate Napoleon one day said to
her, “If ever I establish a republic of women, I shall make you First
Consul.”
Napoleon’s views as to “woman’s mission” are now well known.  Madame
Campan said that she heard from him that when he founded the convent of
the Sisters of la Charite he was urgently solicited to permit perpetual
vows.  He, however, refused to do so, on the ground that tastes may
change, and that he did not see the necessity of excluding from the world
women who might some time or other return to it, and become useful
members of society.  “Nunneries,” he added, “assail the very roots of
population.  It is impossible to calculate the loss which a nation
sustains in having ten thousand women shut up in cloisters.  War does but
little mischief; for the number of males is at least one-twenty-fifth
greater than that of females.  Women may, if they please, be allowed to
make perpetual vows at fifty years of age; for then their task is
fulfilled.”
Napoleon once said to Madame Campan, “The old systems of education were
good for nothing; what do young women stand in need of, to be well
brought up in France?"–"Of mothers,” answered Madame Campan.  “It is
well said,” replied Napoleon.  “Well, madame, let the French be indebted
to you for bringing up mothers for their children."–"Napoleon one day
interrupted Madame de Stael in the midst of a profound political argument
to ask her whether she had nursed her children.”
Never had the establishment at St. Germain been in a more flourishing
condition than in 1802-3.  What more could Madame Campan wish?  For ten
years absolute in her own house, she seemed also safe from the caprice of
power.  But the man who then disposed of the fate of France and Europe
was soon to determine otherwise.
After the battle of Austerlitz the State undertook to bring up, at the
public expense, the sisters, daughters, or nieces of those who were
decorated with the Cross of Honour.  The children of the warriors killed
or wounded in glorious battle were to find paternal care in the ancient
abodes of the Montmorencys and the Condes.  Accustomed to concentrate
around him all superior talents, fearless himself of superiority,
Napoleon sought for a person qualified by experience and abilities to
conduct the institution of Ecouen; he selected Madame Campan.
Comte de Lacepede, the pupil, friend, and rival of Buffon, then Grand
Chancellor of the Legion of Honour, assisted her with his enlightened
advice.  Napoleon, who could descend with ease from the highest political
subjects to the examination of the most minute details; who was as much
at home in inspecting a boarding-school for young ladies as in reviewing
the grenadiers of his guard; whom it was impossible to deceive, and who
was not unwilling to find fault when he visited the establishment at
Ecouen,–was forced to say, “It is all right.”
     [Napoleon wished to be informed of every particular of the
     furniture, government, and order of the house, the instruction and
     education of the pupils.  The internal regulations were submitted to
     him.  One of the intended rules, drawn up by Madame Campan, proposed
     that the children should hear mass on Sundays and Thursdays.
     Napoleon himself wrote on the margin, “every day."]
“In the summer of 1811," relates Madame Campan, “Napoleon, accompanied by
Marie Louise and several personages of distinction, visited the
establishment at Ecouen.  After inspecting the chapel and the
refectories, Napoleon desired that the three principal pupils might be
presented to him.  ’Sire,’ said I, ’I cannot select three; I must present
six.’  He turned on his heel and repaired to the platform, where, after
seeing all the classes assembled, he repeated his demand.  ’Sire,’ said
I, ’I beg leave to inform your Majesty that I should commit an injustice
towards several other pupils who are as far advanced as those whom I
might have the honour to present to you.’
“Berthier and others intimated to me, in a low tone of voice, that I
should get into disgrace by my noncompliance.  Napoleon looked over the
whole of the house, entered into the most trivial details, and after
addressing questions to several of the pupils: ’Well, madame,’ said he,
’I am satisfied; show me your six best pupils.’”  Madame Campan presented
them to him; and as he stepped into his carriage, he desired that their
names might be sent to Berthier.  On addressing the list to the Prince de
Neufchatel, Madame Campan added to it the names of four other pupils, and
all the ten obtained a pension of 300 francs.  During the three hours
which this visit occupied, Marie Louise did not utter a single word.
M. de Beaumont, chamberlain to the Empress Josephine, one day at
Malmaison was expressing his regret that M. D––-, one of Napoleon’s
generals, who had recently been promoted, did not belong to a great
family.  “You mistake, monsieur,” observed Madame Campan, “he is of very
ancient descent; he is one of the nephews of Charlemagne.  All the heroes
of our army sprang from the elder branch of that sovereign’s family, who
never emigrated.”
When Madame Campan related this circumstance she added: “After the 30th
of March, 1814, some officers of the army of Conde presumed to say to
certain French marshals that it was a pity they were not more nobly
connected.  In answer to this, one of them said, ’True nobility,
gentlemen, consists in giving proofs of it.  The field of honour has
witnessed ours; but where are we to look for yours?  Your swords have
rusted in their scabbards.  Our laurels may well excite envy; we have
earned them nobly, and we owe them solely to our valour.  You have merely
inherited a name.  This is the distinction between us.”
     [When one of the princes of the smaller German States was showing
     Marechal Lannes, with a contemptuous superiority of manner but ill
     concealed, the portraits of his ancestors, and covertly alluding to
     the absence of Lannes’s, that general turned the tables on him by
     haughtily remarking, “But I am an ancestor."]
Napoleon used to observe that if he had had two such field-marshals as
Suchet in Spain he would have not only conquered but kept the Peninsula.
Suchet’s sound judgment, his governing yet conciliating spirit, his
military tact, and his bravery, had procured him astonishing success.
"It is to be regretted,” added he, “that a sovereign cannot improvise men
of his stamp.”
On the 19th of March, 1815, a number of papers were left in the King’s
closet.  Napoleon ordered them to be examined, and among them was found
the letter written by Madame Campan to Louis XVIII., immediately after
the first restoration.  In this letter she enumerated the contents of the
portfolio which Louis XVI. had placed under her care.  When Napoleon read
this letter, he said, “Let it be sent to the office of Foreign Affairs;
it is an historical document.”
Madame Campan thus described a visit from the Czar of Russia: “A few days
after the battle of Paris the Emperor Alexander came to Ecouen, and he
did me the honour to breakfast with me.  After showing him over the
establishment I conducted him to the park, the most elevated point of
which overlooked the plain of St. Denis.  ’Sire,’ said I, ’from this
point I saw the battle of Paris’–’If,’ replied the Emperor, ’that battle
had lasted two hours longer we should not have had a single cartridge at
our disposal.  We feared that we had been betrayed; for on arriving so
precipitately before Paris all our plans were laid, and we did not expect
the firm resistance we experienced.’  I next conducted the Emperor to the
chapel, and showed him the seats occupied by ’le connetable’ (the
constable) of Montmorency, and ’la connetable’ (the constable’s lady),
when they went to hear mass.  ’Barbarians like us,’ observed the Emperor,
’would say la connetable and le connetable.’
“The Czar inquired into the most minute particulars respecting the
establishment of Ecouen, and I felt great pleasure in answering his
questions.  I recollect having dwelt on several points which appeared to
me to be very important, and which were in their spirit hostile to
aristocratic principles.  For example, I informed his Majesty that the
daughters of distinguished and wealthy individuals and those of the
humble and obscure mingled indiscriminately in the establishment.  ’If,’
said I, ’I were to observe the least pretension on account of the rank or
fortune of parents, I should immediately put an end to it.  The most
perfect equality is preserved; distinction is awarded only to merit and
industry.  The pupils are obliged to cut out and make all their own
clothes.  They are taught to clean and mend lace; and two at a time, they
by turns, three times a week, cook and distribute food to the poor of the
village.  The young girls who have been brought up at Ecouen, or in my
boarding-school at St. Germain, are thoroughly acquainted with everything
relating to household business, and they are grateful to me for having
made that a part of their education.  In my conversations with them I
have always taught them that on domestic management depends the
preservation or dissipation of their fortunes.’
“The post-master of Ecouen was in the courtyard at the moment when the
Emperor, as he stepped into his carriage, told me he would send some
sweetmeats for the pupils.  I immediately communicated to them the
intelligence, which was joyfully received; but the sweetmeats were looked
for in vain.  When Alexander set out for England he changed horses at
Ecouen, and the post-master said to him: ’Sire, the pupils of Ecouen are
still expecting the sweetmeats which your Majesty promised them.’  To
which the Emperor replied that he had directed Saken to send them.  The
Cossacks had most likely devoured the sweetmeats, and the poor little
girls, who had been so highly flattered by the promise, never tasted
them.”
“A second house was formed at St. Denis, on the model of that of Ecouen.
Perhaps Madame Campan might have hoped for a title to which her long
labours gave her a right; perhaps the superintendence of the two houses
would have been but the fair recompense of her services; but her
fortunate years had passed her fate was now to depend on the most
important events.  Napoleon had accumulated such a mass of power as no
one but himself in Europe could overturn.  France, content with thirty
years of victories, in vain asked for peace and repose.  The army which
had triumphed in the sands of Egypt, on the summits of the Alps, and in
the marshes of Holland, was to perish amidst the snows of Russia.
Nations combined against a single man.  The territory of France was
invaded.  The orphans of Ecouen, from the windows of the mansion which
served as their asylum, saw in the distant plain the fires of the Russian
bivouacs, and once more wept the deaths of their fathers.  Paris
capitulated.  France hailed the return of the descendants of Henri IV.;
they reascended the throne so long filled by their ancestors, which the
wisdom of an enlightened prince established on the empire of the laws.
     [A lady, connected with the establishment of St. Denis, told Madame
     Campan that Napoleon visited it during the Hundred Days, and that
     the pupils were so delighted to see him that they crowded round him,
     endeavouring to touch his clothes, and evincing the most extravagant
     joy.  The matron endeavoured to silence them; but Napoleon said,
     ’Let them alone; let them alone.  This may weaken the head, but it
     strengthens the heart.’"]
This moment, which diffused joy amongst the faithful servants of the
royal family, and brought them the rewards of their devotion, proved to
Madame Campan a period of bitter vexation.  The hatred of her enemies had
revived.  The suppression of the school at Ecouen had deprived her of her
position; the most absurd calumnies followed her into her retreat; her
attachment to the Queen was suspected; she was accused not only of
ingratitude but of perfidy.  Slander has little effect on youth, but in
the decline of life its darts are envenomed with a mortal poison.  The
wounds which Madame Campan had received were deep.  Her sister, Madame
Auguie, had destroyed herself; M. Rousseau, her brother-in-law, had
perished, a victim of the reign of terror.  In 1813 a dreadful accident
had deprived her of her niece, Madame de Broc, one of the most amiable
and interesting beings that ever adorned the earth.  Madame Campan seemed
destined to behold those whom she loved go down to the grave before her.
Beyond the walls of the mansion of Ecouen, in the village which surrounds
it, Madame Campan had taken a small house where she loved to pass a few
hours in solitary retirement.  There, at liberty to abandon herself to
the memory of the past, the superintendent of the imperial establishment
became, once more, for the moment, the first lady of the chamber to Marie
Antoinette.  To the few friends whom she admitted into this retreat she
would show, with emotion, a plain muslin gown which the Queen had worn,
and which was made from a part of Tippoo Saib’s present.  A cup, out of
which Marie Antoinette had drunk; a writing-stand, which she had long
used, were, in her eyes, of inestimable value; and she has often been
discovered sitting, in tears, before the portrait of her royal mistress.
After so many troubles Madame Campan sought a peaceful retreat.  Paris
had become odious to her.
She paid a visit to one of her most beloved pupils, Mademoiselle Crouzet,
who had married a physician at Mantes, a man of talent, distinguished for
his intelligence, frankness, and cordiality.
     [M. Maigne, physician to the infirmaries at Mantes.  Madame Campan
     found in him a friend and comforter, of whose merit and affection
     she knew the value.]
Mantes is a cheerful place of residence, and the idea of an abode there
pleased her.  A few intimate friends formed a pleasant society, and she
enjoyed a little tranquillity after so many disturbances.  The revisal of
her “Memoirs,” the arrangement of the interesting anecdotes of which her
"Recollections” were to consist, alone diverted her mind from the one
powerful sentiment which attached her to life.  She lived only for her
son.  M. Campan deserved the tenderness of, his mother.  No sacrifice had
been spared for his education.  After having pursued that course of study
which, under the Imperial Government, produced men of such distinguished
merit, he was waiting till time and circumstances should afford him an
opportunity of devoting his services to his country.  Although the state
of his health was far from good, it did not threaten any rapid or
premature decay; he was, however, after a few days’ illness, suddenly
taken from his family.  “I never witnessed so heartrending a scene,” M.
Maigne says, “as that which took place when Marechal Ney’s lady, her
niece, and Madame Pannelier, her sister, came to acquaint her with this
misfortune.–[The wife of Marechal Ney was a daughter of Madame Auguie,
and had been an intimate friend of Hortense Beauharnais.]–When they
entered her apartment she was in bed.  All three at once uttered a
piercing cry.  The two ladies threw themselves on their knees, and kissed
her hands, which they bedewed with tears.  Before they could speak to her
she read in their faces that she no longer possessed a son.  At that
instant her large eyes, opening wildly, seemed to wander.  Her face grew
pale, her features changed, her lips lost their colour, she struggled to
speak, but uttered only inarticulate sounds, accompanied by piercing
cries.  Her gestures were wild, her reason was suspended.  Every part of
her being was in agony.  To this state of anguish and despair no calm
succeeded, until her tears began to flow.  Friendship and the tenderest
cares succeeded for a moment in calming her grief, but not in diminishing
its power.
“This violent crisis had disturbed her whole organisation.  A cruel
disorder, which required a still more cruel operation, soon manifested
itself.  The presence of her family, a tour which she made in
Switzerland, a residence at Baden, and, above all, the sight, the tender
and charming conversation of a person by whom she was affectionately
beloved, occasionally diverted her mind, and in a slight degree relieved
her suffering.”  She underwent a serious operation, performed with
extraordinary promptitude and the most complete success.  No unfavourable
symptoms appeared; Madame Campan was thought to be restored to her
friends; but the disorder was in the blood; it took another course: the
chest became affected.  “From that moment,” says M. Maigne, “I could
never look on Madame Campan as living; she herself felt that she belonged
no more to this world.”
“My friend,” she said to her physician the day before her death, “I am
attached to the simplicity of religion.  I hate all that savours of
fanaticism.”  When her codicil was presented for her signature, her hand
trembled; “It would be a pity,” she said, “to stop when so fairly on the
road.”
Madame Campan died on the 16th of March, 1822.  The cheerfulness she
displayed throughout her malady had nothing affected in it.  Her
character was naturally powerful and elevated.  At the approach of death
she evinced the soul of a sage, without abandoning for an instant her
feminine character.
I was fifteen years of age when I was appointed reader to Mesdames.
I will begin by describing the Court at that period.
Maria Leczinska was just dead; the death of the Dauphin had preceded hers
by three years; the Jesuits were suppressed, and piety was to be found at
Court only in the apartments of Mesdames.  The Duc de Choiseuil ruled.
Etiquette still existed at Court with all the forms it had acquired under
Louis XIV.; dignity alone was wanting.  As to gaiety, there was none.
Versailles was not the place at which to seek for assemblies where French
spirit and grace were displayed.  The focus of wit and intelligence was
Paris.
The King thought of nothing but the pleasures of the chase: it might have
been imagined that the courtiers indulged themselves in making epigrams
by hearing them say seriously, on those days when the King did not hunt,
"The King does nothing to-day."–[In sporting usance (see SOULAIRE, p.
316).]
The arrangement beforehand of his movements was also a matter of great
importance with Louis XV.  On the first day of the year he noted down in
his almanac the days of departure for Compiegne, Fontainebleau, Choisy,
etc.  The weightiest matters, the most serious events, never deranged
this distribution of his time.
Since the death of the Marquise de Pompadour, the King had no titled
mistress; he contented himself with his seraglio in the Parc-aux-Cerfs.
It is well known that the monarch found the separation of Louis de
Bourbon from the King of France the most animating feature of his royal
existence.  “They would have it so; they thought it for the best,” was
his way of expressing himself when the measures of his ministers were
unsuccessful.  The King delighted to manage the most disgraceful points
of his private expenses himself; he one day sold to a head clerk in the
War Department a house in which one of his mistresses had lodged; the
contract ran in the name of Louis de Bourbon, and the purchaser himself
took in a bag the price of the house in gold to the King in his private
closet.
     [Until recently little was known about the Parc-aux-Cerfs, and it
     was believed that a great number of young women had been maintained
     there at enormous expense.  The investigations of M. J. A.  Le Roi,
     given in his interesting work, “Curiosites Historiques sur Louis
     XIII., Louis XIV., Louis XV.,” etc., Paris, Plon, 1864, have thrown
     fresh light upon the matter.  The result he arrives at (see page 229
     of his work) is that the house in question (No. 4 Rue St. Mederic,
     on the site of the Pare-aux-Cerfs, or breeding-place for deer, of
     Louis XIII) was very small, and could have held only one girl, the
     woman in charge of her, and a servant.  Most of the girls left it
     only when about to be confined, and it sometimes stood vacant for
     five or six months.  It may have been rented before the date of
     purchase, and other houses seem sometimes to have been used also;
     but in any case, it is evident that both the number of girls and the
     expense incurred have been absurdly exaggerated.  The system
     flourished under Madame de Pompadour, but ceased as soon as Madame
     du Barry obtained full power over the King, and the house was then
     sold to M. J. B. Sevin for 16,000 livres, on 27th May, 1771, Louis
     not acting under the name of Louis de Bourbon, but as King,–"Vente
     par le Roi, notre Sire.”  In 1755 he had also been declared its
     purchaser in a similar manner.  Thus, Madame Campan is in error in
     saying that the King made the contract as Louis de Bourbon.]–[And
     it also possible that Madam Campan was correct and that the house
     she refers to as sold for a “bag of gold” was another of the several
     of the seraglio establishments of Louis XV.  D.W.]
Louis XV. saw very little of his family.  He came every morning by a
private staircase into the apartment of Madame Adelaide.
     [Louis XV. seemed to feel for Madame Adelaide the tenderness he had
     had for the Duchesse de Bourgogne, his mother, who perished so
     suddenly, under the eyes and almost in the arms of Louis XIV.  The
     birth of Madame Adelaide, 23d March, 1732, was followed by that of
     Madame Victoire Louise Marie Therese on the 11th May, 1733.  Louis
     had, besides, six daughters: Mesdames Sophie and Louise, who are
     mentioned in this chapter; the Princesses Marie and Felicite, who
     died young; Madame Henriette died at Versailles in 1752, aged
     twenty-four; and finally, Madame the Duchess of Parma, who also died
     at the Court.]
He often brought and drank there coffee that he had made himself.  Madame
Adelaide pulled a bell which apprised Madame Victoire of the King’s
visit; Madame Victoire, on rising to go to her sister’s apartment, rang
for Madame Sophie, who in her turn rang for Madame Louise.  The
apartments of Mesdames were of very large dimensions.  Madame Louise
occupied the farthest room.  This latter lady was deformed and very
short; the poor Princess used to run with all her might to join the daily
meeting, but, having a number of rooms to cross, she frequently in spite
of her haste, had only just time to embrace her father before he set out
for the chase.
Every evening, at six, Mesdames interrupted my reading to them to
accompany the princes to Louis XV.; this visit was called the King’s
’debotter’,–[Debotter, meaning the time of unbooting.]– and was marked
by a kind of etiquette.  Mesdames put on an enormous hoop, which set out
a petticoat ornamented with gold or embroidery; they fastened a long
train round their waists, and concealed the undress of the rest of their
clothing by a long cloak of black taffety which enveloped them up to the
chin.  The chevaliers d’honneur, the ladies in waiting, the pages, the
equerries, and the ushers bearing large flambeaux, accompanied them to
the King.  In a moment the whole palace, generally so still, was in
motion; the King kissed each Princess on the forehead, and the visit was
so short that the reading which it interrupted was frequently resumed at
the end of a quarter of an hour; Mesdames returned to their apartments,
and untied the strings of their petticoats and trains; they resumed their
tapestry, and I my book.
During the summer season the King sometimes came to the residence of
Mesdames before the hour of his ’debotter’.  One day he found me alone in
Madame Victoire’s closet, and asked me where ’Coche’[Piggy] was; I
started, and he repeated his question, but without being at all the more
understood.  When the King was gone I asked Madame of whom he spoke.  She
told me that it was herself, and very coolly explained to me, that, being
the fattest of his daughters, the King had given her the familiar name of
’Coche’; that he called Madame Adelaide, ’Logue’ [Tatters], Madame
Sophie, ’Graille’[Mite], and Madame Louise, ’Chiffie’[Rubbish].  The
people of the King’s household observed that he knew a great number of
such words; possibly he had amused himself with picking them out from
dictionaries.  If this style of speaking betrayed the habits and tastes
of the King, his manner savoured nothing of such vulgarity; his walk was
easy and noble, he had a dignified carriage of the head, and his aspect,
with out being severe, was imposing; he combined great politeness with a
truly regal demeanour, and gracefully saluted the humblest woman whom
curiosity led into his path.
He was very expert in a number of trifling matters which never occupy
attention but when there is a lack of something better to employ it; for
instance, he would knock off the top of an egg-shell at a single stroke
of his fork; he therefore always ate eggs when he dined in public, and
the Parisians who came on Sundays to see the King dine, returned home
less struck with his fine figure than with the dexterity with which he
broke his eggs.
Repartees of Louis XV., which marked the keenness of his wit and the
elevation of his sentiments, were quoted with pleasure in the assemblies
of Versailles.
This Prince was still beloved; it was wished that a style of life
suitable to his age and dignity should at length supersede the errors of
the past, and justify the love of his subjects.  It was painful to judge
him harshly.  If he had established avowed mistresses at Court, the
uniform devotion of the Queen was blamed for it.  Mesdames were
reproached for not seeking to prevent the King’s forming an intimacy with
some new favourite.  Madame Henriette, twin sister of the Duchess of
Parma, was much regretted, for she had considerable influence over the
King’s mind, and it was remarked that if she had lived she would have
been assiduous in finding him amusements in the bosom of his family,
would have followed him in his short excursions, and would have done the
honours of the ’petits soupers’ which he was so fond of giving in his
private apartments.
Mesdames too much neglected the means of pleasing the wing, but the cause
of that was obvious in the little attention he had paid them in their
youth.
In order to console the people under their sufferings, and to shut their
eyes to the real depredations on the treasury, the ministers occasionally
pressed the most extravagant measures of reform in the King’s household,
and even in his personal expenses.
Cardinal Fleury, who in truth had the merit of reestablishing the
finances, carried this system of economy so far as to obtain from the
King the suppression of the household of the four younger Princesses.
They were brought up as mere boarders in a convent eighty leagues distant
from the Court.  Saint Cyr would have been more suitable for the
reception of the King’s daughters; but probably the Cardinal shared some
of those prejudices which will always attach to even the most useful
institutions, and which, since the death of Louis XIV., had been raised
against the noble establishment of Madame de Maintenon.  Madame Louise
often assured me that at twelve years of age she was not mistress of the
whole alphabet, and never learnt to read fluently until after her return
to Versailles.
Madame Victoire attributed certain paroxysms of terror, which she was
never able to conquer, to the violent alarms she experienced at the Abbey
of Fontevrault, whenever she was sent, by way of penance, to pray alone
in the vault where the sisters were interred.
A gardener belonging to the abbey died raving mad.  His habitation,
without the walls, was near a chapel of the abbey, where Mesdames were
taken to repeat the prayers for those in the agonies of death.  Their
prayers were more than once interrupted by the shrieks of the dying man.
When Mesdames, still very young, returned to Court, they enjoyed the
friendship of Monseigneur the Dauphin, and profited by his advice.  They
devoted themselves ardently to study, and gave up almost the whole of
their time to it; they enabled themselves to write French correctly, and
acquired a good knowledge of history.  Italian, English, the higher
branches of mathematics, turning and dialing, filled up in succession
their leisure moments.  Madame Adelaide, in particular, had a most
insatiable desire to learn; she was taught to play upon all instruments,
from the horn (will it be believed!) to the Jew’s-harp.
Madame Adelaide was graced for a short time with a charming figure; but
never did beauty so quickly vanish.  Madame Victoire was handsome and
very graceful; her address, mien, and smile were in perfect accordance
with the goodness of her heart.  Madame Sophie was remarkably ugly; never
did I behold a person with so unprepossessing an appearance; she walked
with the greatest rapidity; and, in order to recognise the people who
placed themselves along her path without looking at them, she acquired
the habit of leering on one side, like a hare.  This Princess was so
exceedingly diffident that a person might be with her daily for years
together without hearing her utter a single word.  It was asserted,
however, that she displayed talent, and even amiability, in the society
of some favourite ladies.  She taught herself a great deal, but she
studied alone; the presence of a reader would have disconcerted her very
much.  There were, however, occasions on which the Princess, generally so
intractable, became all at once affable and condescending, and manifested
the most communicative good-nature; this would happen during a storm; so
great was her alarm on such an occasion that she then approached the most
humble, and would ask them a thousand obliging questions; a flash of
lightning made her squeeze their hands; a peal of thunder would drive her
to embrace them, but with the return of the calm, the Princess resumed
her stiffness, her reserve, and her repellent air, and passed all by
without taking the slightest notice of any one, until a fresh storm
restored to her at once her dread and her affability. [Which reminds one
of the elder (and puritanic) Cato who said that he “embraced” his wife
only when it thundered, but added that he did enjoy a good thunderstorm.
D.W.]
Mesdames found in a beloved brother, whose rare attainments are known to
all Frenchmen, a guide in everything wanting to their education.  In
their august mother, Maria Leczinska, they possessed the noblest example
of every pious and social virtue; that Princess, by her eminent qualities
and her modest dignity, veiled the failings of the King, and while she
lived she preserved in the Court of Louis XV. that decorous and dignified
tone which alone secures the respect due to power.  The Princesses, her
daughters, were worthy of her; and if a few degraded beings did aim the
shafts of calumny at them, these shafts dropped harmless, warded off by
the elevation of their sentiments and the purity of their conduct.
If Mesdames had not tasked themselves with numerous occupations, they
would have been much to be pitied.  They loved walking, but could enjoy
nothing beyond the public gardens of Versailles; they would have
cultivated flowers, but could have no others than those in their windows.
The Marquise de Durfort, since Duchesse de Civrac, afforded to Madame
Victoire agreeable society.  The Princess spent almost all her evenings
with that lady, and ended by fancying herself domiciled with her.
Madame de Narbonne had, in a similar way, taken pains to make her
intimate acquaintance pleasant to Madame Adelaide.
Madame Louise had for many years lived in great seclusion; I read to her
five hours a day.  My voice frequently betrayed the exhaustion of my
lungs; the Princess would then prepare sugared water for me, place it by
me, and apologise for making me read so long, on the score of having
prescribed a course of reading for herself.
One evening, while I was reading, she was informed that M. Bertin,
’ministre des parties casuelles’, desired to speak with her; she went out
abruptly, returned, resumed her silks and embroidery, and made me resume
my book; when I retired she commanded me to be in her closet the next
morning at eleven o’clock.  When I got there the Princess was gone out;
I learnt that she had gone at seven in the morning to the Convent of the
Carmelites of St. Denis, where she was desirous of taking the veil.
I went to Madame Victoire; there I heard that the King alone had been
acquainted with Madame Louise’s project; that he had kept it faithfully
secret, and that, having long previously opposed her wish, he had only on
the preceding evening sent her his consent; that she had gone alone into
the convent, where she was expected; and that a few minutes afterwards
she had made her appearance at the grating, to show to the Princesse de
Guistel, who had accompanied her to the convent gate, and to her equerry,
the King’s order to leave her in the monastery.
Upon receiving the intelligence of her sister’s departure, Madame
Adelaide gave way to violent paroxysms of rage, and reproached the King
bitterly for the secret, which he had thought it his duty to preserve.
Madame Victoire missed the society of her favourite sister, but she shed
tears in silence only.  The first time I saw this excellent Princess
after Madame Louise’s departure, I threw myself at her feet, kissed her
hand, and asked her, with all the confidence of youth, whether she would
quit us as Madame Louise had done.  She raised me, embraced me; and said,
pointing to the lounge upon which she was extended, “Make yourself easy,
my dear; I shall never have Louise’s courage.  I love the conveniences of
life too well; this lounge is my destruction.”  As soon as I obtained
permission to do so, I went to St. Denis to see my late mistress; she
deigned to receive me with her face uncovered, in her private parlour;
she told me she had just left the wash-house, and that it was her turn
that day to attend to the linen.  “I much abused your youthful lungs for
two years before the execution of my project,” added she. “I knew that
here I could read none but books tending to our salvation, and I wished
to review all the historians that had interested me.”
She informed me that the King’s consent for her to go to St. Denis had
been brought to her while I was reading; she prided herself, and with
reason, upon having returned to her closet without the slightest mark of
agitation, though she said she felt so keenly that she could scarcely
regain her chair.  She added that moralists were right when they said
that happiness does not dwell in palaces; that she had proved it; and
that, if I desired to be happy, she advised me to come and enjoy a
retreat in which the liveliest imagination might find full exercise in
the contemplation of a better world.  I had no palace, no earthly
grandeur to sacrifice to God; nothing but the bosom of a united family;
and it is precisely there that the moralists whom she cited have placed
true happiness.  I replied that, in private life, the absence of a
beloved and cherished daughter would be too cruelly felt by her family.
The Princess said no more on the subject.
The seclusion of Madame Louise was attributed to various motives; some
were unkind enough to suppose it to have been occasioned by her
mortification at being, in point of rank, the last of the Princesses.
I think I penetrated the true cause.  Her aspirations were lofty; she
loved everything sublime; often while I was reading she would interrupt
me to exclaim, “That is beautiful! that is noble!”  There was but one
brilliant action that she could perform,–to quit a palace for a cell,
and rich garments for a stuff gown.  She achieved it!
I saw Madame Louise two or three times more at the grating.  I was
informed of her death by Louis XVI.  “My Aunt Louise,” said he to me,
"your old mistress, is just dead at St.  Denis.  I have this moment
received intelligence of it.  Her piety and resignation were admirable,
and yet the delirium of my good aunt recalled to her recollection that
she was a princess, for her last words were, ’To paradise, haste, haste,
full speed.’  No doubt she thought she was again giving orders to her
equerry.”
     [The retirement of Madame Louise, and her removal from Court, had
     only served to give her up entirely to the intrigues of the clergy.
     She received incessant visits from bishops, archbishops, and
     ambitious priests of every rank; she prevailed on the King, her
     father, to grant many ecclesiastical preferments, and probably
     looked forward to playing an important part when the King, weary of
     his licentious course of life, should begin to think of religion.
     This, perhaps, might have been the case had not a sudden and
     unexpected death put an end to his career.  The project of Madame
     Louise fell to the ground in consequence of this event.  She
     remained in her convent, whence she continued to solicit favours,
     as I knew from the complaints of the Queen, who often said to me,
     “Here is another letter from my Aunt Louise.  She is certainly the
     most intriguing little Carmelite in the kingdom.”  The Court went to
     visit her about three times a year, and I recollect that the Queen,
     intending to take her daughter there, ordered me to get a doll
     dressed like a Carmelite for her, that the young Princess might be
     accustomed, before she went into the convent, to the habit of her
     aunt, the nun.–MADAME CAMPAN]
Madame Victoire, good, sweet-tempered, and affable, lived with the most
amiable simplicity in a society wherein she was much caressed; she was
adored by her household.  Without quitting Versailles, without
sacrificing her easy chair, she fulfilled the duties of religion with
punctuality, gave to the poor all she possessed, and strictly observed
Lent and the fasts.  The table of Mesdames acquired a reputation for
dishes of abstinence, spread abroad by the assiduous parasites at that of
their maitre d’hotel.  Madame Victoire was not indifferent to good
living, but she had the most religious scruples respecting dishes of
which it was allowable to partake at penitential times.  I saw her one
day exceedingly tormented by her doubts about a water-fowl, which was
often served up to her during Lent.  The question to be determined was,
whether it was ’maigre’ or ’gras’.  She consulted a bishop, who happened
to be of the party: the prelate immediately assumed the grave attitude of
a judge who is about to pronounce sentence.  He answered the Princess
that, in a similar case of doubt, it had been resolved that after
dressing the bird it should be pricked over a very cold silver dish; if
the gravy of the animal congealed within a quarter of an hour, the
creature was to be accounted flesh; but if the gravy remained in an oily
state, it might be eaten without scruple.  Madame Victoire immediately
made the experiment: the gravy did not congeal; and this was a source of
great joy to the Princess, who was very partial to that sort of game.
The abstinence which so much occupied the attention of Madame Victoire
was so disagreeable to her, that she listened with impatience for the
midnight hour of Holy Saturday; and then she was immediately supplied
with a good dish of fowl and rice, and sundry other succulent viands.
She confessed with such amiable candour her taste for good cheer and the
comforts of life, that it would have been necessary to be as severe in
principle as insensible to the excellent qualities of the Princess, to
consider it a crime in her.
Madame Adelaide had more mind than Madame Victoire; but she was
altogether deficient in that kindness which alone creates affection for
the great, abrupt manners, a harsh voice, and a short way of speaking,
rendering her more than imposing.  She carried the idea of the
prerogative of rank to a high pitch.  One of her chaplains was unlucky
enough to say ’Dominus vobiscum’ with rather too easy an air; the
Princess rated him soundly for it after mass, and told him to remember
that he was not a bishop, and not again to think of officiating in the
style of a prelate.
Mesdames lived quite separate from the King.  Since the death of Madame
de Pompadour he had lived alone.  The enemies of the Duc de Choiseul did
not know in what department, nor through what channel, they could prepare
and bring about the downfall of the man who stood in their way.  The King
was connected only with women of so low a class that they could not be
made use of for any delicate intrigue; moreover, the Parc-aux-Cerfs was a
seraglio, the beauties of which were often replaced; it was desirable to
give the King a mistress who could form a circle, and in whose drawing-
room the long-standing attachment of the King for the Duc de Choiseul
might be overcome.  It is true that Madame du Barry was selected from a
class sufficiently low.  Her origin, her education, her habits, and
everything about her bore a character of vulgarity and shamelessness; but
by marrying her to a man whose pedigree dated from 1400, it was thought
scandal would be avoided.  The conqueror of Mahon conducted this coarse
intrigue.
     [It appeared at this period as if every feeling of dignity was lost.
     “Few noblemen of the French Court,” says a writer of the time,
     “preserved themselves from the general corruption.  The Marechal de
     Brissac was one of the latter.  He was bantered on the strictness of
     his principles of honour and honesty; it was thought strange that he
     should be offended by being thought, like so many others, exposed to
     hymeneal disgrace.  Louis XV., who was present, and laughed at his
     angry fit, said to him: ’Come, M. de Brissac, don’t be angry; ’tis
     but a trifling evil; take courage.’–’Sire,’ replied M. de Brissac,
     ’I possess all kinds of courage, except that which can brave
     shame.’"–NOTE BY THE EDITOR.]
Such a mistress was judiciously selected for the diversion of the latter
years of a man weary of grandeur, fatigued with pleasure, and cloyed with
voluptuousness.  Neither the wit, the talents, the graces of the Marquise
de Pompadour, her beauty, nor even her love for the King, would have had
any further influence over that worn-out being.
He wanted a Roxalana of familiar gaiety, without any respect for the
dignity of the sovereign.  Madame du Barry one day so far forgot
propriety as to desire to be present at a Council of State.  The King was
weak enough to consent to it.  There she remained ridiculously perched
upon the arm of his chair, playing all sorts of childish monkey tricks,
calculated to please an old sultan.
Another time she snatched a packet of sealed letters from the King’s
hand.  Among them she had observed one from Comte de Broglie.  She told
the King that she knew that rascal Broglie spoke ill of her to him, and
that for once, at least, she would make sure he should read nothing
respecting her.  The King wanted to get the packet again; she resisted,
and made him run two or three times round the table, which was in the
middle of the council-chamber, and then, on passing the fireplace, she
threw the letters into the grate, where they were consumed.  The King
became furious; he seized his audacious mistress by the arm, and put her
out of the door without speaking to her.  Madame du Barry thought herself
utterly disgraced; she returned home, and remained two hours, alone,
abandoned to the utmost distress.  The King went to her; she threw
herself at his feet, in tears, and he pardoned her.
Madame la Marechale de Beauvau, the Duchesse de Choiseul, and the
Duchesse de Grammont had renounced the honour of the King’s intimate
acquaintance rather than share it with Madame du Barry.  But a few years
after the death of Louis XV., Madame la Marechale being alone at the Val,
a house belonging to M. de Beauvau, Mademoiselle de Dillon saw the
Countess’s calash take shelter in the forest of St. Germain during a
violent storm.  She invited her in, and the Countess herself related
these particulars, which I had from Madame de Beauvau.
The Comte du Barry, surnamed ’le roue’ (the profligate), and Mademoiselle
du Barry advised, or rather prompted, Madame du Barry in furtherance of
the plans of the party of the Marechal de Richelieu and the Duc
d’Aiguillon.  Sometimes they even set her to act in such a way as to have
a useful influence upon great political measures.  Under pretence that
the page who accompanied Charles I. in his flight was a Du Barry or
Barrymore, they persuaded the Comtesse du Barry to buy in London that
fine portrait which we now have in the Museum.  She had the picture
placed in her drawing-room, and when she saw the King hesitating upon the
violent measure of breaking up his Parliament, and forming that which was
called the Maupeou Parliament, she desired him to look at the portrait of
a king who had given way to his Parliament.
     [The “Memoirs of General Dumouriez,” vol. i., page 142, contain
     some curious particulars about Madame Du Barry; and novel details
     respecting her will be found at page 243 of “Curiosites
     Historiques,” by J. A. Le Rol (Paris, Plon, 1864).  His
     investigations lead to the result that her real name was Jean Becu,
     born, 19th August, 1743, at Vaucouleurs, the natural daughter of
     Anne Becu, otherwise known as “Quantiny.”  Her mother afterwards
     married Nicolas Rancon.  Comte Jean du Barry met her among the demi-
     monde, and succeeded, about 1767, and by the help of his friend
     Label, the valet de chambre of Louis XV., in introducing her to the
     King under the name of Mademoiselle l’Ange.  To be formally
     mistress, a husband had to be found.  The Comte Jean du Barry,
     already married himself, found no difficulty in getting his brother,
     Comte Guillaume, a poor officer of the marine troops, to accept the
     post of husband.  In the marriage-contract, signed on 23d July,
     1768, she was described as the daughter of Anne Becu and of an
     imaginary first husband, Sieur Jean Jacques Gomard de Vaubernier,"
     and three years were taken off her age.  The marriage-contract was
     so drawn as to leave Madame du Barry entirely free from all control
     by her husband.  The marriage was solemnised on 1st September, 1768,
     after which the nominal husband returned to Toulouse.  Madame du
     Barry in later years provided for him; and in 1772, tired of his
     applications, she obtained an act of separation from him.  He
     married later Jeanne Madeleine Lemoine, and died in 1811.  Madame du
     Barry took care of her mother, who figured as Madame de Montrable.
     In all, she received from the King, M. Le Roi calculates, about
     twelve and a half millions of livres.  On the death of Louis XV.
     she had to retire first to the Abbey of Pont-aux-Dames, near Meaux,
     then she was allowed to go to her small house at St. Vrain, near
     Arpajon, and, finally, in 1775, to her chateau at Louveciennes.
     Much to her credit be it said, she retained many of her friends,
     and was on the most intimate terms till his death with the Duc de
     Brissac (Louis Hercule Timoldon de Cosse-Brissac), who was killed at
     Versailles in the massacre of the prisoners in September, 1792,
     leaving at his death a large legacy to her.  Even the Emperor Joseph
     visited her.  In 1791 many of her jewels were stolen and taken to
     England.  This caused her to make several visits to that country,
     where she gained her suit.  But these visits, though she took every
     precaution to legalise them, ruined her.  Betrayed by her servants,
     among them by Zamor, the negro page, she was brought before the
     Revolutionary tribunal, and was guillotined on 8th December, 1793,
     in a frenzy of terror, calling for mercy and for delay up to the
     moment when her head fell.]
The men of ambition who were labouring to overthrow the Duc de Choiseul
strengthened themselves by their concentration at the house of the
favourite, and succeeded in their project.  The bigots, who never forgave
that minister the suppression of the Jesuits, and who had always been
hostile to a treaty of alliance with Austria, influenced the minds of
Mesdames.  The Duc de La Vauguyon, the young Dauphin’s governor, infected
them with the same prejudices.
Such was the state of the public mind when the young Archduchess Marie
Antoinette arrived at the Court of Versailles, just at the moment when
the party which brought her there was about to be overthrown.
Madame Adelaide openly avowed her dislike to a princess of the House of
Austria; and when M. Campan, my father-in-law, went to receive his
orders, at the moment of setting off with the household of the
Dauphiness, to go and receive the Archduchess upon the frontiers, she
said she disapproved of the marriage of her nephew with an archduchess;
and that, if she had the direction of the matter, she would not send for
an Austrian.
MARIE ANTOINETTE JOSEPHE JEANNE DE LORRAINE, Archduchess of Austria,
daughter of Francois de Lorraine and of Maria Theresa, was born on the
2d of November, 1755, the day of the earthquake at Lisbon; and this
catastrophe, which appeared to stamp the era of her birth with a fatal
mark, without forming a motive for superstitious fear with the Princess,
nevertheless made an impression upon her mind.  As the Empress already
had a great number of daughters, she ardently desired to have another
son, and playfully wagered against her wish with the Duc de Tarouka,
who had insisted that she would give birth to an archduke.  He lost by
the birth of the Princess, and had executed in porcelain a figure with
one knee bent on the earth, and presenting tablets, upon which the
following lines by Metastasio were engraved:
               I lose by your fair daughter’s birth
               Who prophesied a son;
               But if she share her mother’s worth,
               Why, all the world has won!
The Queen was fond of talking of the first years of her youth.  Her
father, the Emperor Francis, had made a deep impression upon her heart;
she lost him when she was scarcely seven years old.  One of those
circumstances which fix themselves strongly in the memories of children
frequently recalled his last caresses to her.  The Emperor was setting
out for Innspruck; he had already left his palace, when he ordered a
gentleman to fetch the Archduchess Marie Antoinette, and bring her to his
carriage.  When she came, he stretched out his arms to receive her, and
said, after having pressed her to his bosom, “I wanted to embrace this
child once more.”  The Emperor died suddenly during the journey, and
never saw his beloved daughter again.
The Queen often spoke of her mother, and with profound respect, but she
based all her schemes for the education of her children on the essentials
which had been neglected in her own.  Maria Theresa, who inspired awe by
her great qualities, taught the Archduchesses to fear and respect rather
than to love her; at least I observed this in the Queen’s feelings
towards her august mother.  She therefore never desired to place between
her own children and herself that distance which had existed in the
imperial family.  She cited a fatal consequence of it, which had made
such a powerful impression upon her that time had never been able to
efface it.
The wife of the Emperor Joseph II. was taken from him in a few days by
an attack of smallpox of the most virulent kind.  Her coffin had recently
been deposited in the vault of the imperial family.  The Archduchess
Josepha, who had been betrothed to the King of Naples, at the instant she
was quitting Vienna received an order from the Empress not to set off
without having offered up a prayer in the vault of her forefathers.  The
Archduchess, persuaded that she should take the disorder to which her
sister-in-law had just fallen a victim, looked upon this order as her
death-warrant.  She loved the young Archduchess Marie Antoinette
tenderly; she took her upon her knees, embraced her with tears, and told
her she was about to leave her, not for Naples, but never to see her
again; that she was going down then to the tomb of her ancestors, and
that she should shortly go again there to remain.  Her anticipation was
realised; confluent smallpox carried her off in a very few days, and her
youngest sister ascended the throne of Naples in her place.
The Empress was too much taken up with high political interests to have
it in her power to devote herself to maternal attentions.  The celebrated
Wansvietten, her physician, went daily, to visit the young imperial
family, and afterwards to Maria Theresa, and gave the most minute details
respecting the health of the Archdukes and Archduchesses, whom she
herself sometimes did not see for eight or ten days at a time.  As soon
as the arrival of a stranger of rank at Vienna was made known, the
Empress brought her family about her, admitted them to her table, and by
this concerted meeting induced a belief that she herself presided over
the education of her children.
The chief governesses, being under no fear of inspection from Maria
Theresa, aimed at making themselves beloved by their pupils by the common
and blamable practice of indulgence, so fatal to the future progress and
happiness of children.  Marie Antoinette was the cause of her governess
being dismissed, through a confession that all her copies and all her
letters were invariably first traced out with pencil; the Comtesse de
Brandes was appointed to succeed her, and fulfilled her duties with great
exactness and talent.  The Queen looked upon having been confided to her
care so late as a misfortune, and always continued upon terms of
friendship with that lady.  The education of Marie Antoinette was
certainly very much neglected.  With the exception of the Italian
language, all that related to belles lettres, and particularly to
history, even that of her own country, was almost entirely unknown to
her.  This was soon found out at the Court of France, and thence arose
the generally received opinion that she was deficient in sense.  It will
be seen in the course of these “Memoirs” whether that opinion was well or
ill founded.  The public prints, however, teemed with assertions of the
superior talents of Maria Theresa’s children.  They often noticed the
answers which the young Princesses gave in Latin to the harangues
addressed to them; they uttered them, it is true, but without
understanding them; they knew not a single word of that language.
Mention was one day made to the Queen of a drawing made by her, and
presented by the Empress to M. Gerard, chief clerk of Foreign Affairs, on
the occasion of his going to Vienna to draw up the articles for her
marriage-contract.  “I should blush,” said she, “if that proof of the
quackery of my education were shown to me.  I do not believe that I ever
put a pencil to that drawing.”  However, what had been taught her she
knew perfectly well.  Her facility of learning was inconceivable, and if
all her teachers had been as well informed and as faithful to their duty
as the Abbe Metastasio, who taught her Italian, she would have attained
as great a superiority in the other branches of her education.  The Queen
spoke that language with grace and ease, and translated the most
difficult poets.  She did not write French correctly, but she spoke it
with the greatest fluency, and even affected to say that she had lost
German.  In fact she attempted in 1787 to learn her mother-tongue, and
took lessons assiduously for six weeks; she was obliged to relinquish
them, finding all the difficulties which a Frenchwoman, who should take
up the study too late, would have to encounter.  In the same manner she
gave up English, which I had taught her for some time, and in which she
had made rapid progress.  Music was the accomplishment in which the Queen
most delighted.  She did not play well on any instrument, but she had
become able to read at sight like a first-rate professor.  She attained
this degree of perfection in France, this branch of her education having
been neglected at Vienna as much as the rest.  A few days after her
arrival at Versailles, she was introduced to her singing-master, La
Garde, author of the opera of “Egle.”  She made a distant appointment
with him, needing, as she said, rest after the fatigues of the journey
and the numerous fetes which had taken place at Versailles; but her
motive was her desire to conceal how ignorant she was of the rudiments of
music.  She asked M. Campan whether his son, who was a good musician,
could give her lessons secretly for three months.  “The Dauphiness,"
added she, smiling, “must be careful of the reputation of the
Archduchess.”  The lessons were given privately, and at the end of three
months of constant application she sent for M. la Garde, and surprised
him by her skill.
The desire to perfect Marie Antoinette in the study of the French
language was probably the motive which determined Maria Theresa to
provide for her as teachers two French actors: Aufresne, for
pronunciation and declamation, and Sainville, for taste in French
singing; the latter had been an officer in France, and bore a bad
character.  The choice gave just umbrage to our Court.  The Marquis de
Durfort, at that time ambassador at Vienna, was ordered to make a
representation to the Empress upon her selection.  The two actors were
dismissed, and the Princess required that an ecclesiastic should be sent
to her.  Several eminent ecclesiastics declined taking upon themselves so
delicate an office; others who were pointed out by Maria Theresa (among
the rest the Abbe Grisel) belonged to parties which sufficed to exclude
them.
The Archbishop of Toulouse one day went to the Duc de Choiseul at the
moment when he was much embarrassed upon the subject of this nomination;
he proposed to him the Abby de Vermond, librarian of the College des
Quatre Nations.  The eulogistic manner in which he spoke of his protege
procured the appointment for the latter on that very day; and the
gratitude of the Abbe de Vermond towards the prelate was very fatal to
France, inasmuch as after seventeen years of persevering attempts to
bring him into the ministry, he succeeded at last in getting him named
Comptroller-General and President of the Council.–[Comte de Brienne,
later Archbishop of Sens.]
This Abbe de Vermond directed almost all the Queen’s actions.  He
established his influence over her at an age when impressions are most
durable; and it was easy to see that he had taken pains only to render
himself beloved by his pupil, and had troubled himself very little with
the care of instructing her.  He might have even been accused of having,
by a sharp-sighted though culpable policy, purposely left her in
ignorance.  Marie Antoinette spoke the French language with much grace,
but wrote it less perfectly.  The Abbe de Vermond revised all the letters
which she sent to Vienna.  The insupportable folly with which he boasted
of it displayed the character of a man more flattered at being admitted
into her intimate secrets than anxious to fulfil worthily the high office
of her preceptor.
     [The Abbe de Vermond encouraged the impatience of etiquette shown by
     Marie Antoinette while she was Dauphiness.  When she became Queen he
     endeavoured openly to induce her to shake off the restraints she
     still respected.  If he chanced to enter her apartment at the time
     she was preparing to go out, “For whom,” he would say, in a tone of
     raillery, “is this detachment of warriors which I found in the
     court? Is it some general going to inspect his army?  Does all this
     military display become a young Queen adored by her subjects?”  He
     would call to her mind the simplicity with which Maria Theresa
     lived; the visits she made without guards, or even attendants, to
     the Prince d’Esterhazy, to the Comte de Palfi, passing whole days
     far from the fatiguing ceremonies of the Court.  The Abbe thus
     artfully flattered the inclinations of Marie Antoinette, and showed
     her how she might disguise, even from herself, her aversion for the
     ceremonies observed by the descendants of Louis XIV.-MADAME CAMPAN.]
His pride received its birth at Vienna, where Maria Theresa, as much to
give him authority with the Archduchess as to make herself acquainted
with his character, permitted him to mix every evening with the private
circle of her family, into which the future Dauphiness had been admitted
for some time.  Joseph II., the elder Archduchess, and a few noblemen
honoured by the confidence of Maria Theresa, composed the party; and
reflections on the world, on courts, and the duties of princes were the
usual topics of conversation.  The Abbe de Vermond, in relating these
particulars, confessed the means which he had made use of to gain
admission into this private circle.  The Empress, meeting him at the
Archduchess’s, asked him if he had formed any connections in Vienna.
"None, Madame,” replied he; “the apartment of the Archduchess and the
hotel of the ambassador of France are the only places which the man
honoured with the care of the Princess’s education should frequent."
A month afterwards Maria Theresa, through a habit common enough among
sovereigns, asked him the same question, and received precisely the same
answer.  The next day he received an order to join the imperial family
every evening.
It is extremely probable, from the constant and well-known intercourse
between this man and Comte de Mercy, ambassador of the Empire during the
whole reign of Louis XVI., that he was useful to the Court of Vienna, and
that he often caused the Queen to decide on measures, the consequences of
which she did not consider.  Not of high birth, imbued with all the
principles of the modern philosophy, and yet holding to the hierarchy of
the Church more tenaciously than any other ecclesiastic; vain, talkative,
and at the same time cunning and abrupt; very ugly and affecting
singularity; treating the most exalted persons as his equals, sometimes
even as his inferiors, the Abbe de Vermond received ministers and bishops
when in his bath; but said at the same time that Cardinal Dubois was a
fool; that a man such as he, having obtained power, ought to make
cardinals, and refuse to be one himself.
Intoxicated with the reception he had met with at the Court of Vienna,
and having till then seen nothing of high life, the Abbe de Vermond
admired no other customs than those of the imperial family; he ridiculed
the etiquette of the House of Bourbon incessantly; the young Dauphiness
was constantly incited by his sarcasms to get rid of it, and it was he
who first induced her to suppress an infinity of practices of which he
could discern neither the prudence nor the political aim.  Such is the
faithful portrait of that man whom the evil star of Marie Antoinette had
reserved to guide her first steps upon a stage so conspicuous and so full
of danger as that of the Court of Versailles.
It will be thought, perhaps, that I draw the character of the Abbe de
Vermond too unfavourably; but how can I view with any complacency one
who, after having arrogated to himself the office of confidant and sole
counsellor of the Queen, guided her with so little prudence, and gave us
the mortification of seeing that Princess blend, with qualities which
charmed all that surrounded her, errors alike injurious to her glory and
her happiness?
While M. de Choiseul, satisfied with the person whom M. de Brienne had
presented, despatched him to Vienna with every eulogium calculated to
inspire unbounded confidence, the Marquis de Durfort sent off a
hairdresser and a few French fashions; and then it was thought sufficient
pains had been taken to form the character of a princess destined to
share the throne of France.
The marriage of Monseigneur the Dauphin with the Archduchess was
determined upon during the administration of the Duc de Choiseul.
The Marquis de Durfort, who was to succeed the Baron de Breteuil in the
embassy to Vienna, was appointed proxy for the marriage ceremony; but six
months after the Dauphin’s marriage the Duc de Choiseul was disgraced,
and Madame de Marsan and Madame de Guemenee, who grew more powerful
through the Duke’s disgrace, conferred that embassy, upon Prince Louis
de Rohan, afterwards cardinal and grand almoner.
Hence it will be seen that the Gazette de France is a sufficient answer
to those libellers who dared to assert that the young Archduchess was
acquainted with the Cardinal de Rohan before the period of her marriage.
A worse selection in itself, or one more disagreeable to Maria Theresa,
than that which sent to her, in quality, of ambassador, a man so
frivolous and so immoral as Prince Louis de Rohan, could not have been
made.  He possessed but superficial knowledge upon any subject, and was
totally ignorant of diplomatic affairs.  His reputation had gone before
him to Vienna, and his mission opened under the most unfavourable
auspices.  In want of money, and the House of Rohan being unable to make
him any considerable advances, he obtained from his Court a patent which
authorised him to borrow the sum of 600,000 livres upon his benefices,
ran in debt above a million, and thought to dazzle the city and Court of
Vienna by the most indecent and ill-judged extravagance.  He formed a
suite of eight or ten gentlemen, of names sufficiently high-sounding;
twelve pages equally well born, a crowd of officers and servants, a
company of chamber musicians, etc.  But this idle pomp did not last;
embarrassment and distress soon showed themselves; his people, no longer
receiving pay, in order to make money, abused the privileges of
ambassadors, and smuggled
     [I have often heard the Queen say that, at Vienna, in the office of
     the secretary of the Prince de Rohan, there were sold in one year
     more silk stockings than at Lyons and Paris together.–MADAME
     CAMPAN.]
with so much effrontery that Maria Theresa, to put a stop to it without
offending the Court of France, was compelled to suppress the privileges
in this respect of all the diplomatic bodies, a step which rendered the
person and conduct of Prince Louis odious in every foreign Court.  He
seldom obtained private audiences from the Empress, who did not esteem
him, and who expressed herself without reserve upon his conduct both as a
bishop and as an ambassador.  He thought to obtain favour by assisting to
effect the marriage of the Archduchess Elizabeth, the elder sister of
Marie Antoinette, with Louis XV., an affair which was awkwardly
undertaken, and of which Madame du Barry had no difficulty in causing the
failure.  I have deemed it my duty to omit no particular of the moral and
political character of a man whose existence was subsequently so
injurious to the reputation of Marie Antoinette.
A superb pavilion had been prepared upon the frontier near Kehl.  It
consisted of a vast salon, connected with two apartments, one of which
was assigned to the lords and ladies of the Court of Vienna, and the
other to the suite of the Dauphiness, composed of the Comtesse de
Noailles, her lady of honour; the Duchesse de Cosse, her dame d’atours;
four ladies of the palace; the Comte de Saulx-Tavannes, chevalier
d’honneur; the Comte de Tesse, first equerry; the Bishop of Chartres,
first almoner; the officers of the Body Guard, and the equerries.
When the Dauphiness had been entirely undressed, in order that she might
retain nothing belonging to a foreign Court (an etiquette always observed
on such an occasion), the doors were opened; the young Princess came
forward, looking round for the Comtesse de Noailles; then, rushing into
her arms, she implored her, with tears in her eyes, and with heartfelt
sincerity, to be her guide and support.
While doing justice to the virtues of the Comtesse de Noailles, those
sincerely attached to the Queen have always considered it as one of her
earliest misfortunes not to have found, in the person of her adviser,
a woman indulgent, enlightened, and administering good advice with that
amiability which disposes young persons to follow it.  The Comtesse de
Noailles had nothing agreeable in her appearance; her demeanour was stiff
and her mien severe.  She was perfect mistress of etiquette; but she
wearied the young Princess with it, without making her sensible of its
importance.  It would have been sufficient to represent to the Dauphiness
that in France her dignity depended much upon customs not necessary at
Vienna to secure the respect and love of the good and submissive
Austrians for the imperial family; but the Dauphiness was perpetually
tormented by the remonstrances of the Comtesse de Noailles, and at the
same time was led by the Abbe de Vermond to ridicule both the lessons
upon etiquette and her who gave them.  She preferred raillery to
argument, and nicknamed the Comtesse de Noailles Madame l’Etiquette.
The fetes which were given at Versailles on the marriage of the Dauphin
were very splendid.  The Dauphiness arrived there at the hour for her
toilet, having slept at La Muette, where Louis XV. had been to receive
her; and where that Prince, blinded by a feeling unworthy of a sovereign
and the father of a family, caused the young Princess, the royal family,
and the ladies of the Court, to sit down to supper with Madame du Barry.
The Dauphiness was hurt at this conduct; she spoke of it openly enough to
those with whom she was intimate, but she knew how to conceal her
dissatisfaction in public, and her behaviour showed no signs of it.
She was received at Versailles in an apartment on the ground floor, under
that of the late Queen, which was not ready for her until six months
after her marriage.
The Dauphiness, then fifteen years of age, beaming with freshness,
appeared to all eyes more than beautiful.  Her walk partook at once of
the dignity of the Princesses of her house, and of the grace of the
French; her eyes were mild, her smile amiable.  When she went to chapel,
as soon as she had taken the first few steps in the long gallery, she
discerned, all the way to its extremity, those persons whom she ought to
salute with the consideration due to their rank; those on whom she should
bestow an inclination of the head; and lastly, those who were to be
satisfied with a smile, calculated to console them for not being entitled
to greater honours.
Louis XV. was enchanted with the young Dauphiness; all his conversation
was about her graces, her vivacity, and the aptness of her repartees.
She was yet more successful with the royal family when they beheld her
shorn of the splendour of the diamonds with which she had been adorned
during the first days of her marriage.  When clothed in a light dress of
gauze or taffety she was compared to the Venus dei Medici, and the
Atalanta of the Marly Gardens.  Poets sang her charms; painters attempted
to copy her features.  One artist’s fancy led him to place the portrait
of Marie Antoinette in the heart of a full-blown rose.  His ingenious
idea was rewarded by Louis XV.
The King continued to talk only of the Dauphiness; and Madame du Barry
ill-naturedly endeavoured to damp his enthusiasm.  Whenever Marie
Antoinette was the topic, she pointed out the irregularity of her
features, criticised the ’bons mots’ quoted as hers, and rallied the King
upon his prepossession in her favour.  Madame du Barry was affronted at
not receiving from the Dauphiness those attentions to which she thought
herself entitled; she did not conceal her vexation from the King; she was
afraid that the grace and cheerfulness of the young Princess would make
the domestic circle of the royal family more agreeable to the old
sovereign, and that he would escape her chains; at the same time, hatred
to the Choiseul party contributed powerfully to excite the enmity of the
favourite.
The fall of that minister took place in November, 1770, six months after
his long influence in the Council had brought about the alliance with the
House of Austria and the arrival of Marie Antoinette at the Court of
France.  The Princess, young, frank, volatile, and inexperienced, found
herself without any other guide than the Abbe de Vermond, in a Court
ruled by the enemy of the minister who had brought her there, and in the
midst of people who hated Austria, and detested any alliance with the
imperial house.
The Duc d’Aiguillon, the Duc de La Vauguyon, the Marechal de Richelieu,
the Rohans, and other considerable families, who had made use of Madame
du Barry to overthrow the Duke, could not flatter themselves,
notwithstanding their powerful intrigues, with a hope of being able to
break off an alliance solemnly announced, and involving such high
political interests.  They therefore changed their mode of attack, and it
will be seen how the conduct of the Dauphin served as a basis for their
hopes.
The Dauphiness continually gave proofs of both sense and feeling.
Sometimes she even suffered herself to be carried away by those
transports of compassionate kindness which are not to be controlled by
the customs which rank establishes.
In consequence of the fire in the Place Louis XV., which occurred at the
time of the nuptial entertainments, the Dauphin and Dauphiness sent
their, whole income for the year to the relief of the unfortunate
families who lost their relatives on that disastrous day.
This was one of those ostentatious acts of generosity which are dictated
by the policy of princes, at least as much as by their compassion; but
the grief of Marie Antoinette was profound, and lasted several days;
nothing could console her for the loss of so many innocent victims; she
spoke of it, weeping, to her ladies, one of whom, thinking, no doubt, to
divert her mind, told her that a great number of thieves had been found
among the bodies, and that their pockets were filled with watches and
other valuables.  “They have at least been well punished,” added the
person who related these particulars.  “Oh, no, no, madame!” replied the
Dauphiness; “they died by the side of honest people.”
The Dauphiness had brought from Vienna a considerable number of white
diamonds; the King added to them the gift of the diamonds and pearls of
the late Dauphiness, and also put into her hands a collar of pearls, of a
single row, the smallest of which was as large as a filbert, and which
had been brought into France by Anne of Austria, and appropriated by that
Princess to the use of the Queens and Dauphinesses of France.
The three Princesses, daughters of Louis XV., joined in making her
magnificent presents.  Madame Adelaide at the same time gave the young
Princess a key to the private corridors of the Chateau, by means of
which, without any suite, and without being perceived, she could get to
the apartments of her aunts, and see them in private.  The Dauphiness,
on receiving the key, told them, with infinite grace, that if they had
meant to make her appreciate the superb presents they were kind enough to
bestow upon her, they should not at the same time have offered her one of
such inestimable value; since to that key she should be indebted for an
intimacy and advice unspeakably precious at her age.  She did, indeed,
make use of it very frequently; but Madame Victoire alone permitted her,
so long as she continued Dauphiness, to visit her familiarly.  Madame
Adelaide could not overcome her prejudices against Austrian princesses,
and was wearied with the somewhat petulant gaiety of the Dauphiness.
Madame Victoire was concerned at this, feeling that their society and
counsel would have been highly useful to a young person otherwise likely
to meet with none but sycophants.  She endeavoured, therefore, to induce
her to take pleasure in the society of the Marquise de Durfort, her lady
of honour and favourite.  Several agreeable entertainments took place at
the house of this lady, but the Comtesse de Noailles and the Abbe de
Vermond soon opposed these meetings.
A circumstance which happened in hunting, near the village of Acheres,
in the forest of Fontainebleau, afforded the young Princess an
opportunity of displaying her respect for old age, and her compassion for
misfortune.  An aged peasant was wounded by the stag; the Dauphiness
jumped out of her calash, placed the peasant, with his wife and children,
in it, had the family taken back to their cottage, and bestowed upon them
every attention and every necessary assistance.  Her heart was always
open to the feelings of compassion, and the recollection of her rank
never restrained her sensibility.  Several persons in her service entered
her room one evening, expecting to find nobody there but the officer in
waiting; they perceived the young Princess seated by the side of this
man, who was advanced in years; she had placed near him a bowl full of
water, was stanching the blood which issued from a wound he had received
in his hand with her handkerchief, which she had torn up to bind it, and
was fulfilling towards him all the duties of a pious sister of charity.
The old man, affected even to tears, out of respect allowed his august
mistress to act as she thought proper.  He had hurt himself in
endeavouring to move a rather heavy piece of furniture at the Princess’s
request.
In the month of July, 1770, an unfortunate occurrence that took place in
a family which the Dauphiness honoured with her favour contributed again
to show not only her sensibility but also the benevolence of her
disposition.  One of her women in waiting had a son who was an officer in
the gens d’armes of the guard; this young man thought himself affronted
by a clerk in the War Department, and imprudently sent him a challenge;
he killed his adversary in the forest of Compiegne.  The family of the
young man who was killed, being in possession of the challenge, demanded
justice.  The King, distressed on account of several duels which had
recently taken place, had unfortunately declared that he would show no
mercy on the first event of that kind which could be proved; the culprit
was therefore arrested.  His mother, in the deepest grief, hastened to
throw herself at the feet of the Dauphiness, the Dauphin, and the young
Princesses.  After an hour’s supplication they obtained from the King the
favour so much desired.  On the next day a lady of rank, while
congratulating the Dauphiness, had the malice to add that the mother had
neglected no means of success on the occasion, having solicited not only
the royal family, but even Madame du Barry.  The Dauphiness replied that
the fact justified the favourable opinion she had formed of the worthy
woman; that the heart of a mother should hesitate at nothing for the
salvation of her son; and that in her place, if she had thought it would
be serviceable, she would have thrown herself at the feet of Zamor.
     [A little Indian who carried the Comtesse du Barry’s train.  Louis
     XV.  often amused himself with the little marmoset, and jestingly
     made him Governor of Louveciennes; he received an annual income of
     3,000 francs.]
Some time after the marriage entertainments the Dauphiness made her entry
into Paris, and was received with transports of joy.  After dining in the
King’s apartment at the Tuileries, she was forced, by the reiterated
shouts of the multitude, with whom the garden was filled, to present
herself upon the balcony fronting the principal walk.  On seeing such a
crowd of heads with their eyes fixed upon her, she exclaimed, “Grand-
Dieu! what a concourse!"–"Madame,” said the old Duc de Brissac, the
Governor of Paris, “I may tell you, without fear of offending the
Dauphin, that they are so many lovers.”  2 The Dauphin took no umbrage at
either acclamations or marks of homage of which the Dauphiness was the
object.  The most mortifying indifference, a coldness which frequently
degenerated into rudeness, were the sole feelings which the young Prince
then manifested towards her.  Not all her charms could gain even upon his
senses.  This estrangement, which lasted a long time, was said to be the
work of the Duc de La Vauguyon.
The Dauphiness, in fact, had no sincere friends at Court except the Duc
de Choiseul and his party.  Will it be credited that the plans laid
against Marie Antoinette went so far as divorce?  I have been assured of
it by persons holding high situations at Court, and many circumstances
tend to confirm the opinion.  On the journey to Fontainebleau, in the
year of the marriage, the inspectors of public buildings were gained over
to manage so that the apartment intended for the Dauphin, communicating
with that of the Dauphiness, should not be finished, and a room at the
extremity of the building was temporarily assigned to him.  The
Dauphiness, aware that this was the result of intrigue, had the courage
to complain of it to Louis XV., who, after severe reprimands, gave orders
so positive that within the week the apartment was ready.  Every method
was tried to continue or augment the indifference which the Dauphin long
manifested towards his youthful spouse.  She was deeply hurt at it, but
she never suffered herself to utter the slightest complaint on the
subject.  Inattention to, even contempt for, the charms which she heard
extolled on all sides, nothing induced her to break silence; and some
tears, which would involuntarily burst from her eyes, were the sole
symptoms of her inward sufferings discoverable by those in her service.
Once only, when tired out with the misplaced remonstrances of an old lady
attached to her person, who wished to dissuade her from riding on
horseback, under the impression that it would prevent her producing heirs
to the crown, “Mademoiselle,” said she, “in God’s name, leave me in
peace; be assured that I can put no heir in danger.”
The Dauphiness found at the Court of Louis XV., besides the three
Princesses, the King’s daughters, the Princes also, brothers of the
Dauphin, who were receiving their education, and Clotilde and Elisabeth,
still in the care of Madame de Marsan, governess of the children of
France.  The elder of the two latter Princesses, in 1777, married the
Prince of Piedmont, afterwards King of Sardinia.  This Princess was in
her infancy, so extremely large that the people nicknamed her ’gros
Madame.’
     [Madame Clotilde of France, a sister of the King, was
     extraordinarily fat for her height and age.  One of her playfellows,
     having been indiscreet enough even in her presence to make use of
     the nickname given to her, received a severe reprimand from the
     Comtesse de Marsan, who hinted to her that she would do well in not
     making her appearance again before the Princess.  Madame Clotilde
     sent for her the next day: “My governess,” said she, “has done her
     duty, and I will do mine; come and see me as usual, and think no
     more of a piece of inadvertence, which I myself have forgotten."
     This Princess, so heavy in body, possessed the most agreeable and
     playful wit.  Her affability and grace rendered her dear to all who
     came near her.–NOTE BY THE EDITOR]
The second Princess was the pious Elisabeth, the victim of her respect
and tender attachment for the King, her brother.  She was still scarcely
out of her leading-strings at the period of the Dauphin’s marriage.  The
Dauphiness showed her marked preference.  The governess, who sought to
advance the Princess to whom nature had been least favourable, was
offended at the Dauphiness’s partiality for Madame Elisabeth, and by her
injudicious complaints weakened the friendship which yet subsisted
between Madame Clotilde and Marie Antoinette.  There even arose some
degree of rivalry on the subject of education; and that which the Empress
Maria Theresa bestowed on her daughters was talked of openly and
unfavourably enough.  The Abbe de Vermond thought himself affronted,
took a part in the quarrel, and added his complaints and jokes to those
of the Dauphiness on the criticisms of the governess; he even indulged
himself in his turn in reflections on the tuition of Madame Clotilde.
Everything becomes known at Court.  Madame de Marsan was informed of all
that had been said in the Dauphiness’s circle, and was very angry with
her on account of it.
From that moment a centre of intrigue, or rather gossip, against Marie
Antoinette was established round Madame de Marsan’s fireside; her most
trifling actions were there construed ill; her gaiety, and the harmless
amusements in which she sometimes indulged in her own apartments with the
more youthful ladies of her train, and even with the women in her
service, were stigmatised as criminal.  Prince Louis de Rohan, sent
through the influence of this clique ambassador to Vienna, was the echo
there of these unmerited comments, and threw himself into a series of
culpable accusations which he proffered under the guise of zeal.  He
ceaselessly represented the young Dauphiness as alienating all hearts by
levities unsuitable to the dignity of the French Court.  The Princess
frequently received from the Court of Vienna remonstrances, of the origin
of which she could not long remain in ignorance.  From this period must
be dated that aversion which she never ceased to manifest for the Prince
de Rohan.
About the same time the Dauphiness received information of a letter
written by Prince Louis to the Duc d’Aiguillon, in which the ambassador
expressed himself in very free language respecting the intentions of
Maria Theresa with relation to the partition of Poland.  This letter of
Prince Louis had been read at the Comtesse du Barry’s; the levity of the
ambassador’s correspondence wounded the feelings and the dignity of the
Dauphiness at Versailles, while at Vienna the representations which he
made to Maria Theresa against the young Princess terminated in rendering
the motives of his incessant complaints suspected by the Empress.
Maria Theresa at length determined on sending her private secretary,
Baron de Neni, to Versailles, with directions to observe the conduct of
the Dauphiness with attention, and form a just estimate of the opinion of
the Court and of Paris with regard to that Princess.  The Baron de Neni,
after having devoted sufficient time and intelligence to the subject,
undeceived his sovereign as to the exaggerations of the French
ambassador; and the Empress had no difficulty in detecting, among the
calumnies which he had conveyed to her under the specious excuse of
anxiety for her august daughter, proofs of the enmity of a, party which
had never approved of the alliance of the House of Bourbon with her own.
At this period the Dauphiness, though unable to obtain any influence over
the heart of her husband, dreading Louis XV., and justly mistrusting
everything connected with Madame du Barry and the Duc d’Aiguillon, had
not deserved the slightest reproach for that sort of levity which hatred
and her misfortunes afterwards construed into crime.  The Empress,
convinced of the innocence of Marie Antoinette, directed the Baron de
Neni to solicit the recall of the Prince de Rohan, and to inform the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of all the motives which made her require
it; but the House of Rohan interposed between its protege and the
Austrian envoy, and an evasive answer merely was given.
It was not until two months after the death of Louis XV.  that the Court
of Vienna obtained his recall.  The avowed grounds for requiring it were,
first, the public gallantries of Prince Louis with some ladies of the
Court and others; secondly, his surliness and haughtiness towards other
foreign ministers, which would have had more serious consequences,
especially with the ministers of England and Denmark, if the Empress
herself had not interfered; thirdly, his contempt for religion in a
country where it was particularly necessary to show respect for it.
He had been seen frequently to dress himself in clothes of different
colours, assuming the hunting uniforms of various noblemen whom he
visited, with so much audacity that one day in particular, during the
Fete-Dieu, he and all his legation, in green uniforms laced with gold,
broke through a procession which impeded them, in order to make their way
to a hunting party at the Prince de Paar’s; and fourthly, the immense
debts contracted by him and his people, which were tardily and only in
part discharged.
The succeeding marriages of the Comte de Provence and the Comte d’Artois
with two daughters of the King of Sardinia procured society for the
Dauphiness more suitable to her age, and altered her mode of life.
A pair of tolerably fine eyes drew forth, in favour of the Comtesse de
Provence, upon her arrival at Versailles, the only praises which could
reasonably be bestowed upon her.  The Comtesse d’Artois, though not
deformed, was very small; she had a fine complexion; her face, tolerably
pleasing, was not remarkable for anything except the extreme length of
the nose.  But being good and generous, she was beloved by those about
her, and even possessed some influence so long as she was the only
Princess who had produced heirs to the crown.
From this time the closest intimacy subsisted between the three young
families.  They took their meals together, except on those days when they
dined in public.  This manner of living en famille continued until the
Queen sometimes indulged herself in going to dine with the Duchesse de
Polignac, when she was governess; but the evening meetings at supper were
never interrupted; they took place at the house of the Comtesse de
Provence.  Madame Elisabeth made one of the party when she had finished
her education, and sometimes Mesdames, the King’s aunts, were invited.
The custom, which had no precedent at Court, was the work of Marie
Antoinette, and she maintained it with the utmost perseverance.
The Court of Versailles saw no change in point of etiquette during the
reign of Louis XV.  Play took place at the house of the Dauphiness, as
being the first lady of the State.  It had, from the death of Queen Maria
Leczinska to the marriage of the Dauphin, been held at the abode of
Madame Adelade.  This removal, the result of an order of precedence not
to be violated, was not the less displeasing to Madame Adelaide, who
established a separate party for play in her apartments, and scarcely
ever went to that which not only the Court in general, but also the royal
family, were expected to attend.  The full-dress visits to the King on
his ’debotter’ were continued.  High mass was attended daily.  The
airings of the Princesses were nothing more than rapid races in berlins,
during which they were accompanied by Body Guards, equerries, and pages
on horseback.  They galloped for some leagues from Versailles.  Calashes
were used only in hunting.
The young Princesses were desirous to infuse animation into their circle
of associates by something useful as well as pleasant.  They adopted the
plan of learning and performing all the best plays of the French theatre.
The Dauphin was the only spectator.  The three Princesses, the two
brothers of the King, and Messieurs Campan, father and son, were the sole
performers, but they endeavoured to keep this amusement as secret as an
affair of State; they dreaded the censure of Mesdames, and they had no
doubt that Louis XV. would forbid such pastimes if he knew of them.  They
selected for their performance a cabinet in the entresol which nobody had
occasion to enter.
A kind of proscenium, which could be taken down and shut up in a closet,
formed the whole theatre.  The Comte de Provence always knew his part
with imperturbable accuracy; the Comte d’Artois knew his tolerably well,
and recited elegantly; the Princesses acted badly.  The Dauphiness
acquitted herself in some characters with discrimination and feeling.
The chief pleasure of this amusement consisted in all the costumes being
elegant and accurate.  The Dauphin entered into the spirit of these
diversions, and laughed heartily at the comic characters as they came on
the scene; from these amusements may be dated his discontinuance of the
timid manner of his youth, and his taking pleasure in the society of the
Dauphiness.
It was not till a long time afterwards that I learnt these particulars,
M. Campan having kept the secret; but an unforeseen event had well-nigh
exposed the whole mystery.  One day the Queen desired M. Campan to go
down into her closet to fetch something that she had forgotten; he was
dressed for the character of Crispin, and was rouged.  A private
staircase led direct to the entresol through the dressing-room.  M.
Campan fancied he heard some noise, and remained still, behind the door,
which was shut.  A servant belonging to the wardrobe, who was, in fact,
on the staircase, had also heard some noise, and, either from fear or
curiosity, he suddenly opened the door; the figure of Crispin frightened
him so that he fell down backwards, shouting with his might, “Help!
help!”  My father-in-law raised him up, made him recognise his voice,
and laid upon him an injunction of silence as to what he had seen.
He felt himself, however, bound to inform the Dauphiness of what had
happened, and she was afraid that a similar occurrence might betray their
amusements.  They were therefore discontinued.
The Princess occupied her time in her own apartment in the study of music
and the parts in plays which she had to learn; the latter exercise, at
least, produced the beneficial effect of strengthening her memory and
familiarising her with the French language.
While Louis XV.  reigned, the enemies of Marie Antoinette made no attempt
to change public opinion with regard to her.  She was always popular with
the French people in general, and particularly with the inhabitants of
Paris, who went on every opportunity to Versailles, the majority of them
attracted solely by the pleasure of seeing her.  The courtiers did not
fully enter into the popular enthusiasm which the Dauphiness had
inspired; the disgrace of the Duc de Choiseul had removed her real
support from her; and the party which had the ascendency at Court since
the exile of that minister was, politically, as much opposed to her
family as to herself.  The Dauphiness was therefore surrounded by enemies
at Versailles.
Nevertheless everybody appeared outwardly desirous to please her; for the
age of Louis XV., and the apathetic character of the Dauphin,
sufficiently warned courtiers of the important part reserved for the
Princess during the following reign, in case the Dauphin should become
attached to her.
About the beginning of May, 1774, Louis XV., the strength of whose
constitution had promised a long enough life, was attacked by confluent
smallpox of the worst kind.  Mesdames at this juncture inspired the
Dauphiness with a feeling of respect and attachment, of which she gave
them repeated proofs when she ascended the throne.  In fact, nothing was
more admirable nor more affecting than the courage with which they braved
that most horrible disease.  The air of the palace was infected; more
than fifty persons took the smallpox, in consequence of having merely
loitered in the galleries of Versailles, and ten died of it.
The end of the monarch was approaching.  His reign, peaceful in general,
had inherited strength from the power of his predecessor; on the other
hand, his own weakness had been preparing misfortune for whoever should
reign after him.  The scene was about to change; hope, ambition, joy,
grief, and all those feelings which variously affected the hearts of the
courtiers, sought in vain to disguise themselves under a calm exterior.
It was easy to detect the different motives which induced them every
moment to repeat to every one the question: “How is the King?”  At
length, on the 10th of May, 1774, the mortal career of Louis XV.
terminated.
     [Christopher de Beaumont, Archbishop of Paris, the ardent apostle of
     frequent communion, arrived at Paris with the intention of
     soliciting, in public, the administration of the sacrament to the
     King, and secretly retarding it as much as possible.  The ceremony
     could not take place without the previous and public expulsion of
     the, concubine, according to the canons of the Church and the
     Jesuitical party, of which Christopher was the leader.  This party,
     which had made use of Madame du Barry to suppress the Parliaments,
     to support the Duc d’Aiguillon, and ruin the Choiseul faction, could
     not willingly consent to disgrace her canonically.  The Archbishop
     went into the King’s bedchamber, and found there Madame Adelaide,
     the Duc d’Aumont, the Bishop of Senlis, and Richelieu, in whose
     presence he resolved not to say one word about confession for that
     day.  This reticence so encouraged Louis XV. that, on the Archbishop
     withdrawing, he had Madame du Barry called in, and kissed her
     beautiful hands again with his wonted affection.  On the 2d of May
     the King found himself a little better.  Madame du Barry had brought
     him two confidential physicians, Lorry and Borden, who were enjoined
     to conceal the nature of his sickness from him in order to keep off
     the priests and save her from a humiliating dismissal.  The King’s
     improvement allowed Madame du Barry to divert him by her usual
     playfulness and conversation.  But La Martiniere, who was of the
     Choiseul party, and to whom they durst not refuse his right of
     entry, did not conceal from the King either the nature or the danger
     of his sickness.  The King then sent for Madame du Barry, and said
     to her: “My love, I have got the smallpox, and my illness is very
     dangerous on account of my age and other disorders.  I ought not to
     forget that I am the most Christian King, and the eldest son of the
     Church.  I am sixty-four; the time is perhaps approaching when we
     must separate.  I wish to prevent a scene like that of Metz."
     (when, in 1744, he had dismissed the Duchesse de Chateauroux.)
     “Apprise the Duc d’Aiguillon of what I say, that he may arrange with
     you if my sickness grows worse; so that we may part without any
     publicity.”  The Jansenists and the Duc de Choiseurs party publicly
     said that M. d’Aiguillon and the Archbishop had resolved to let the
     King die without receiving the sacrament rather than disturb Madame
     du Barry.  Annoyed by their remarks, Beaumont determined to go and
     reside at the Lazaristes, his house at Versailles, to avail himself
     of the King’s last moments, and sacrifice Madame du Barry when the
     monarch’s condition should become desperate.  He arrived on the 3d
     of May, but did not see the King.  Under existing circumstances, his
     object was to humble the enemies of his party and to support the
     favourite who had assisted to overcome them.
     A contrary zeal animated the Bishop of Carcassonne, who urged that
     “the King ought to receive the sacrament; and by expelling the
     concubine to give an example of repentance to France and Christian
     Europe, which he had scandalised."–” By what right,” said Cardinal
     de la Roche-Aymon, a complaisant courtier with whom the Bishop was
     at daggers drawn, “do you instruct me?"–"There is my authority,"
     replied the Bishop, holding up his pectoral cross.  “Learn,
     monseigneur, to respect it, and do not suffer your King to die
     without the sacraments of the Church, of which he is the eldest
     son.”  The Duc d’Aiguillon and the Archbishop, who witnessed the
     discussion, put an end to it by asking for the King’s orders
     relative to Madame du Barry.  “She must be taken quietly to your
     seat at Ruelle,” said the King; “I shall be grateful for the care
     Madame d’Aiguillon may take of her.”
     Madame du Barry saw the King again for a moment on the evening of
     the 4th, and promised to return to Court upon his recovery.  She was
     scarcely gone when the King asked for her.  “She is gone,” was the
     answer.  From that moment the disorder gained ground; he thought
     himself a dead man, without the possibility of recovery.  The 5th
     and 6th passed without a word of confession, viaticum, or extreme
     unction.  The Duc de Fronsac threatened to throw the Cure of
     Versailles out of the window if he dared to mention them, but on the
     7th, at three in the morning, the King imperatively called for the
     Abbe Maudous.  Confession lasted seventeen minutes.  The Ducs de la
     Vrillilere and d’Aiguillon wished to delay the viaticum; but La
     Martiniere said to the King: “Sire, I have seen your Majesty in very
     trying circumstances; but never admired you as I have done to-day.
     No doubt your Majesty will immediately finish what you have so well
     begun.”  The King had his confessor Maudoua called back; this was a
     poor priest who had been placed about him for some years before
     because he was old and blind.  He gave him absolution.
     The formal renunciation desired by the Choiseul party, in order to
     humble and annihilate Madame du Barry with solemnity, was no more
     mentioned.  The grand almoner, in concert with the Archbishop,
     composed this formula, pronounced in presence of the viaticum:
     “Although the King owes an account of his conduct to none but God,
     he declares his repentance at having scandalised his subjects, and
     is desirous to live solely for the maintenance of religion and the
     happiness of his people.”
     On the 8th and 9th the disorder grew worse; and the King beheld the
     whole surface of his body coming off piecemeal and corrupted.
     Deserted by his friends and by that crowd of courtiers which had so
     long cringed before him, his only consolation was the piety of his
     daughters.–SOULAVIE, “Historical and Political Memoirs,” vol. i.]
The Comtesse du Barry had, a few days previously, withdrawn to Ruelle, to
the Duc d’Aiguillon’s.  Twelve or fifteen persons belonging to the Court
thought it their duty to visit her there; their liveries were observed,
and these visits were for a long time grounds for disfavour.  More than
six years after the King’s death one of these persons being spoken of in
the circle of the royal family, I heard it remarked, “That was one of the
fifteen Ruelle carriages.”
The whole Court went to the Chateau; the oiel-de boeuf was filled with
courtiers, and the palace with the inquisitive.  The Dauphin had settled
that he would depart with the royal family the moment the King should
breathe his last sigh.  But on such an occasion decency forbade that
positive orders for departure should be passed from mouth to mouth.  The
heads of the stables, therefore, agreed with the people who were in the
King’s room, that the latter should place a lighted taper near a window,
and that at the instant of the King’s decease one of them should
extinguish it.
The taper was extinguished.  On this signal the Body Guards, pages, and
equerries mounted on horseback, and all was ready for setting off.  The
Dauphin was with the Dauphiness.  They were expecting together the
intelligence of the death of Louis XV.  A dreadful noise, absolutely like
thunder, was heard in the outer apartment; it was the crowd of courtiers
who were deserting the dead sovereign’s antechamber, to come and do
homage to the new power of Louis XVI.  This extraordinary tumult informed
Marie Antoinette and her husband that they were called to the throne;
and, by a spontaneous movement, which deeply affected those around them,
they threw themselves on their knees; both, pouring forth a flood of
tears, exclaimed: “O God! guide us, protect us; we are too young to
reign.”
The Comtesse de Noailles entered, and was the first to salute Marie
Antoinette as Queen of France.  She requested their Majesties to
condescend to quit the inner apartments for the grand salon, to receive
the Princes and all the great officers, who were desirous to do homage to
their new sovereigns.  Marie Antoinette received these first visits
leaning upon her husband, with her handkerchief held to her eyes; the
carriages drove up, the guards and equerries were on horseback.  The
Chateau was deserted; every one hastened to fly from contagion, which
there was no longer any inducement to brave.
On leaving the chamber of Louis XV., the Duc de Villequier, first
gentleman of the bedchamber for the year, ordered M. Andouille, the
King’s chief surgeon, to open the body and embalm it.  The chief surgeon
would inevitably have died in consequence.  “I am ready,” replied
Andouille; “but while I operate you shall hold the head; your office
imposes this duty upon you.”  The Duke went off without saying a word,
and the corpse was neither opened nor embalmed.  A few under-servants and
workmen continued with the pestiferous remains, and paid the last duty to
their master; the surgeons directed that spirits of wine should be poured
into the coffin.
The entire Court set off for Choisy at four o’clock; Mesdames the King’s
aunts in their private carriage, and the Princesses under tuition with
the Comtesse de Marsan and the under-governesses.  The King, the Queen,
Monsieur, the King’s brother, Madame, and the Comte and Comtesse d’Artois
went in the same carriage.  The solemn scene that had just passed before
their eyes, the multiplied ideas offered to their imaginations by that
which was just opening, had naturally inclined them to grief and
reflection; but, by the Queen’s own confession, this inclination, little
suited to their age, wholly left them before they had gone half their
journey; a word, drolly mangled by the Comtesse d’Artois, occasioned a
general burst of laughter; and from that moment they dried their tears.
The communication between Choisy and Paris was incessant; never was a
Court seen in greater agitation.  What influence will the royal aunts
have,–and the Queen?  What fate is reserved for the Comtesse du Barry?
Whom will the young King choose for his ministers?  All these questions
were answered in a few days.  It was determined that the King’s youth
required a confidential person near him; and that there should be a prime
minister.  All eyes were turned upon De Machault and De Maurepas, both of
them much advanced in years.  The first had retired to his estate near
Paris; and the second to Pont Chartrain, to which place he had long been
exiled.  The letter recalling M. de Machault was written, when Madame
Adelaide obtained the preference of that important appointment for M. de
Maurepas.  The page to whose care the first letter had been actually
consigned was recalled.
The Duc d’Aiguillon had been too openly known as the private friend of
the King’s mistress; he was dismissed.  M. de Vergennes, at that time
ambassador of France at Stockholm, was appointed Minister for Foreign
Affairs; Comte du Muy, the intimate friend of the Dauphin, the father of
Louis XVI.[?? D.W.], obtained the War Department.  The Abbe Terray in
vain said, and wrote, that he had boldly done all possible injury to the
creditors of the State during the reign of the late King; that order was
restored in the finances; that nothing but what was beneficial to all
parties remained to be done; and that the new Court was about to enjoy
the advantages of the regenerating part of his plan of finance; all these
reasons, set forth in five or six memorials, which he sent in succession
to the King and Queen, did not avail to keep him in office.  His talents
were admitted, but the odium which his operations had necessarily brought
upon his character, combined with the immorality of his private life,
forbade his further stay at Court; he was succeeded by M. de Clugny.  De
Maupeou, the chancellor, was exiled; this caused universal joy.  Lastly,
the reassembling of the Parliaments produced the strongest sensation;
Paris was in a delirium of joy, and not more than one person in a hundred
foresaw that the spirit of the ancient magistracy would be still the
same; and that in a short time it would make new attempts upon the royal
authority.  Madame du Barry had been exiled to Pont-aux-Dames.  This was
a measure rather of necessity than of severity; a short period of
compulsory retreat was requisite in order completely to break off her
connections with State affairs.  The possession of Louveciennes and a
considerable pension were continued to her.
     [The Comtesse du Barry never forgot the mild treatment she
     experienced from the Court of Louis XVI.; during the most violent
     convulsions of the Revolution she signified to the Queen that there
     was no one in France more grieved at the sufferings of her sovereign
     than herself; that the honour she had for years enjoyed, of living
     near the throne, and the unbounded kindness of the King and Queen,
     had so sincerely attached her to the cause of royalty that she
     entreated the Queen to honour her by disposing of all she possessed.
     Though they did not accept her offer, their Majesties were affected
     at her gratitude.  The Comtesse du Barry was, as is well known, one
     of the victims of the Revolution.  She betrayed at the last great
     weakness, and the most ardent desire to live.  She was the only
     woman who wept upon the scaffold and implored for mercy.  Her beauty
     and tears made an impression on the populace, and the execution was
     hurried to a conclusion.–MADAME CAMPAN.]
Everybody expected the recall of M. de Choiseul; the regret occasioned
by his absence among the numerous friends whom he had left at Court,
the attachment of the young Princess who was indebted to him for her
elevation to the throne of France, and all concurring circumstances,
seemed to foretell his return; the Queen earnestly entreated it of the
King, but she met with an insurmountable and unforeseen obstacle.  The
King, it is said, had imbibed the strongest prejudices against that
minister, from secret memoranda penned by his father, and which had been
committed to the care of the Duc de La Vauguyon, with an injunction to
place them in his hands as soon as he should be old enough to study the
art of reigning.  It was by these memoranda that the esteem which he had
conceived for the Marechal du Muy was inspired, and we may add that
Madame Adelaide, who at this early period powerfully influenced the
decisions of the young monarch, confirmed the impressions they had made.
The Queen conversed with M. Campan on the regret she felt at having been
unable to procure the recall of M. de Choiseul, and disclosed the cause
of it to him.  The Abbe de Vermond, who, down to the time of the death of
Louis XV., had been on terms of the strictest friendship with M. Campan,
called upon him on the second day after the arrival of the Court at
Choisy, and, assuming a serious air, said, “Monsieur, the Queen was
indiscreet enough yesterday to speak to you of a minister to whom she
must of course be attached, and whom his friends ardently desire to have
near her; you are aware that we must give up all expectation of seeing
the Duke at Court; you know the reasons why; but you do not know that the
young Queen, having mentioned the conversation in question to me, it was
my duty, both as her preceptor and her friend, to remonstrate severely
with her on her indiscretion in communicating to you those particulars of
which you are in possession.  I am now come to tell you that if you
continue to avail yourself of the good nature of your mistress to
initiate yourself in secrets of State, you will have me for your most
inveterate enemy.  The Queen should find here no other confidant than
myself respecting things that ought to remain secret.”  M. Campan
answered that he did not covet the important and dangerous character at
the new Court which the Abbe wished to appropriate; and that he should
confine himself to the duties of his office, being sufficiently satisfied
with the continued kindness with which the Queen honoured him.
Notwithstanding this, however, he informed the Queen, on the very same
evening, of the injunction he had received.  She owned that she had
mentioned their conversation to the Abbe; that he had indeed seriously
scolded her, in order to make her feel the necessity of being secret in
concerns of State; and she added, “The Abbe cannot like you, my dear
Campan; he did not expect that I should, on my arrival in France, find in
my household a man who would suit me so exactly as you have done.  I know
that he has taken umbrage at it; that is enough.  I know, too, that you
are incapable of attempting anything to injure him in my esteem; an
attempt which would besides be vain, for I have been too long attached to
him.  As to yourself, be easy on the score of the Abbe’s hostility, which
shall not in any way hurt you.”
The Abbe de Vermond having made himself master of the office of sole
confidant to the Queen, was nevertheless agitated whenever he saw the
young King; he could not be ignorant that the Abbe had been promoted by
the Duc de Choiseul, and was believed to favour the Encyclopedists,
against whom Louis XVI.  entertained a secret prejudice, although he
suffered them to gain so great an ascendency during his reign.  The Abbe
had, moreover, observed that the King had never, while Dauphin, addressed
a single word to him; and that he very frequently only answered him with
a shrug of the shoulders.  He therefore determined on writing to Louis
XVI., and intimating that he owed his situation at Court solely to the
confidence with which the late King had honoured him; and that as habits
contracted during the Queen’s education placed him continually in the
closest intimacy with her, he could not enjoy the honour of remaining
near her Majesty without the King’s consent.  Louis XVI. sent back his
letter, after writing upon it these words: “I approve the Abbe de Vermond
continuing in his office about the Queen.”
At the period of his grandfather’s death, Louis XVI. began to be
exceedingly attached to the Queen.  The first period of so deep a
mourning not admitting of indulgence in the diversion of hunting, he
proposed to her walks in the gardens of Choisy; they went out like
husband and wife, the young King giving his arm to the Queen, and
accompanied by a very small suite.  The influence of this example had
such an effect upon the courtiers that the next day several couples, who
had long, and for good reasons, been disunited, were seen walking upon
the terrace with the same apparent conjugal intimacy.  Thus they spent
whole hours, braving the intolerable wearisomeness of their protracted
tete-a-tetes, out of mere obsequious imitation.
The devotion of Mesdames to the King their father throughout his dreadful
malady had produced that effect upon their health which was generally
apprehended.  On the fourth day after their arrival at Choisy they were
attacked by pains in the head and chest, which left no doubt as to the
danger of their situation.  It became necessary instantly to send away
the young royal family; and the Chateau de la Muette, in the Bois de
Boulogne, was selected for their reception.  Their arrival at that
residence, which was very near Paris, drew so great a concourse of people
into its neighbourhood, that even at daybreak the crowd had begun to
assemble round the gates.  Shouts of “Vive le Roi!”  were scarcely
interrupted for a moment between six o’clock in the morning and sunset.
The unpopularity the late King, had drawn upon himself during his latter
years, and the hopes to which a new reign gives birth, occasioned these
transports of joy.
A fashionable jeweller made a fortune by the sale of mourning snuff-
boxes, whereon the portrait of the young Queen, in a black frame of
shagreen, gave rise to the pun: “Consolation in chagrin.”  All the
fashions, and every article of dress, received names expressing the
spirit of the moment.  Symbols of abundance were everywhere represented,
and the head-dresses of the ladies were surrounded by ears of wheat.
Poets sang of the new monarch; all hearts, or rather all heads, in France
were filled with enthusiasm.  Never did the commencement of any reign
excite more unanimous testimonials of love and attachment.  It must be
observed, however, that, amidst all this intoxication, the anti-Austrian
party never lost sight of the young Queen, but kept on the watch, with
the malicious desire to injure her through such errors as might arise
from her youth and inexperience.
Their Majesties had to receive at La Muette the condolences of the ladies
who had been presented at Court, who all felt themselves called on to pay
homage to the new sovereigns.  Old and young hastened to present
themselves on the day of general reception; little black bonnets with
great wings, shaking heads, low curtsies, keeping time with the motions
of the head, made, it must be admitted, a few venerable dowagers appear
somewhat ridiculous; but the Queen, who possessed a great deal of
dignity, and a high respect for decorum, was not guilty of the grave
fault of losing the state she was bound to preserve.  An indiscreet piece
of drollery of one of the ladies of the palace, however, procured her the
imputation of doing so.  The Marquise de Clermont-Tonnerre, whose office
required that she should continue standing behind the Queen, fatigued by
the length of the ceremony, seated herself on the floor, concealed behind
the fence formed by the hoops of the Queen and the ladies of the palace.
Thus seated, and wishing to attract attention and to appear lively, she
twitched the dresses of those ladies, and played a thousand other tricks.
The contrast of these childish pranks with the solemnity which reigned
over the rest of the Queen’s chamber disconcerted her Majesty: she
several times placed her fan before her face to hide an involuntary
smile, and the severe old ladies pronounced that the young Queen had
decided all those respectable persons who were pressing forward to pay
their homage to her; that she liked none but the young; that she was
deficient in decorum; and that not one of them would attend her Court
again.  The epithet ’moqueuse’ was applied to her; and there is no
epithet less favourably received in the world.
The next day a very ill-natured song was circulated; the stamp of the
party to which it was attributable might easily be seen upon it.  I
remember only the following chorus:
                   “Little Queen, you must not be
                    So saucy, with your twenty years;
                    Your ill-used courtiers soon will see
                    You pass, once more, the barriers.
                    Fal lal lal, fal lal la.”
The errors of the great, or those which ill-nature chooses to impute to
them, circulate in the world with the greatest rapidity, and become
historical traditions, which every one delights to repeat.
More than fifteen years after this occurrence I heard some old ladies in
the most retired part of Auvergne relating all the particulars of the day
of public condolence for the late King, on which, as they said, the Queen
had laughed in the faces of the sexagenarian duchesses and princesses who
had thought it their duty to appear on the occasion.
The King and the Princes, his brothers, determined to avail themselves of
the advantages held out by inoculation, as a safeguard against the
illness under which their grandfather had just fallen; but the utility of
this new discovery not being then generally acknowledged in France, many
persons were greatly alarmed at the step; those who blamed it openly
threw all the responsibility of it upon the Queen, who alone, they said,
could have ventured to give such rash advice, inoculation being at this
time established in the Northern Courts.  The operation upon the King and
his brothers, performed by Doctor Jauberthou, was fortunately quite
successful.
When the convalescence of the Princes was perfectly established, the
excursions to Marly became cheerful enough.  Parties on horseback and in
calashes were formed continually.  The Queen was desirous to afford
herself one very innocent gratification; she had never seen the day
break; and having now no other consent than that of the King to seek,
she intimated her wish to him.  He agreed that she should go, at three
o’clock in the morning, to the eminences of the gardens of Marly; and,
unfortunately, little disposed to partake in her amusements, he himself
went to bed.  Foreseeing some inconveniences possible in this nocturnal
party, the Queen determined on having a number of people with her; and
even ordered her waiting women to accompany her.  All precautions were
ineffectual to prevent the effects of calumny, which thenceforward sought
to diminish the general attachment that she had inspired.  A few days
afterwards, the most wicked libel that appeared during the earlier years
of her reign was circulated in Paris.  The blackest colours were employed
to paint an enjoyment so harmless that there is scarcely a young woman
living in the country who has not endeavoured to procure it for herself.
The verses which appeared on this occasion were entitled “Sunrise.”
The Duc d’Orleans, then Duc de Chartres, was among those who accompanied
the young Queen in her nocturnal ramble: he appeared very attentive to
her at this epoch; but it was the only moment of his life in which there
was any advance towards intimacy between the Queen and himself.  The King
disliked the character of the Duc de Chartres, and the Queen always
excluded him from her private society.  It is therefore without the
slightest foundation that some writers have attributed to feelings of
jealousy or wounded self-love the hatred which he displayed towards the
Queen during the latter years of their existence.
It was on this first journey to Marly that Boehmer, the jeweller,
appeared at Court,–a man whose stupidity and avarice afterwards fatally
affected the happiness and reputation of Marie Antoinette.  This person
had, at great expense, collected six pear-formed diamonds of a prodigious
size; they were perfectly matched and of the finest water.  The earrings
which they composed had, before the death of Louis XV., been destined for
the Comtesse du Barry.
Boehmer; by the recommendation of several persons about the Court, came
to offer these jewels to the Queen.  He asked four hundred thousand
francs for them.  The young Princess could not withstand her wish to
purchase them; and the King having just raised the Queen’s income, which,
under the former reign, had been but two hundred thousand livres, to one
hundred thousand crowns a year, she wished to make the purchase out of
her own purse, and not burthen the royal treasury with the payment.  She
proposed to Boehmer to take off the two buttons which formed the tops of
the clusters, as they could be replaced by two of her own diamonds.  He
consented, and then reduced the price of the earrings to three hundred
and sixty thousand francs; the payment for which was to be made by
instalments, and was discharged in the course of four or five years by
the Queen’s first femme de chambre, deputed to manage the funds of her
privy purse.  I have omitted no details as to the manner in which the
Queen first became possessed of these jewels, deeming them very needful
to place in its true light the too famous circumstance of the necklace,
which happened near the end of her reign.
It was also on this first journey to Marly that the Duchesse de Chartres,
afterwards Duchesse d’Orleans, introduced into the Queen’s household
Mademoiselle Bertin, a milliner who became celebrated at that time for
the total change she effected in the dress of the French ladies.
It may be said that the mere admission of a milliner into the house of
the Queen was followed by evil consequences to her Majesty.  The skill of
the milliner, who was received into the household, in spite of the custom
which kept persons of her description out of it, afforded her the
opportunity of introducing some new fashion every day.  Up to this time
the Queen had shown very plain taste in dress; she now began to make it a
principal occupation; and she was of course imitated by other women.
All wished instantly to have the same dress as the Queen, and to wear the
feathers and flowers to which her beauty, then in its brilliancy,
lent an indescribable charm.  The expenditure of the younger ladies was
necessarily much increased; mothers and husbands murmured at it; some few
giddy women contracted debts; unpleasant domestic scenes occurred;
in many families coldness or quarrels arose; and the general report
was,–that the Queen would be the ruin of all the French ladies.
Fashion continued its fluctuating progress; and head-dresses, with their
superstructures of gauze, flowers, and feathers, became so lofty that the
women could not find carriages high enough to admit them; and they were
often seen either stooping, or holding their heads out of the windows.
Others knelt down in order to manage these elevated objects of ridicule
with less danger.
     [If the use of these extravagant feathers and head-dresses had
     continued, say the memoirs of that period very seriously, it would
     have effected a revolution in architecture.  It would have been
     found necessary to raise the doors and ceilings of the boxes at the
     theatre, and particularly the bodies of carriages.  It was not
     without mortification that the King observed the Queen’s adoption of
     this style of dress: she was never so lovely in his eyes as when
     unadorned by art.  One day Carlin, performing at Court as harlequin,
     stuck in his hat, instead of the rabbit’s tail, its prescribed
     ornament, a peacock’s feather of excessive length.  This new
     appendage, which repeatedly got entangled among the scenery, gave
     him an opportunity for a great deal of buffoonery.  There was some
     inclination to punish him; but it was presumed that he had not
     assumed the feather without authority.-NOTE BY THE EDITOR.]
Innumerable caricatures, exhibited in all directions, and some of which
artfully gave the features of the Queen, attacked the extravagance of
fashion, but with very little effect.  It changed only, as is always the
case, through the influence of inconstancy and time.
The Queen’s toilet was a masterpiece of etiquette; everything was done in
a prescribed form.  Both the dame d’honneur and the dame d’atours usually
attended and officiated, assisted by the first femme de chambre and two
ordinary women.  The dame d’atours put on the petticoat, and handed the
gown to the Queen.  The dame d’honneur poured out the water for her hands
and put on her linen.  When a princess of the royal family happened to be
present while the Queen was dressing, the dame d’honneur yielded to her
the latter act of office, but still did not yield it directly to the
Princesses of the blood; in such a case the dame d’honneur was accustomed
to present the linen to the first femme de chambre, who, in her turn,
handed it to the Princess of the blood.  Each of these ladies observed
these rules scrupulously as affecting her rights.  One winter’s day it
happened that the Queen, who was entirely undressed, was just going to
put on her shift; I held it ready unfolded for her; the dame d’honneur
came in, slipped off her gloves, and took it.  A scratching was heard at
the door; it was opened, and in came the Duchesse d’Orleans: her gloves
were taken off, and she came forward to take the garment; but as it would
have been wrong in the dame d’honneur to hand it to her she gave it to
me, and I handed it to the Princess.  More scratching it was Madame la
Comtesse de Provence; the Duchesse d’Orleans handed her the linen.  All
this while the Queen kept her arms crossed upon her bosom, and appeared
to feel cold; Madame observed her uncomfortable situation, and, merely
laying down her handkerchief without taking off her gloves, she put on
the linen, and in doing so knocked the Queen’s cap off.  The Queen
laughed to conceal her impatience, but not until she had muttered several
times, “How disagreeable!  how tiresome!”
All this etiquette, however inconvenient, was suitable to the royal
dignity, which expects to find servants in all classes of persons,
beginning even with the brothers and sisters of the monarch.
Speaking here of etiquette, I do not allude to majestic state, appointed
for days of ceremony in all Courts.  I mean those minute ceremonies that
were pursued towards our Kings in their inmost privacies, in their hours
of pleasure, in those of pain, and even during the most revolting of
human infirmities.
These servile rules were drawn up into a kind of code; they offered to a
Richelieu, a La Rochefoucauld and a Duras, in the exercise of their
domestic functions, opportunities of intimacy useful to their interests;
and their vanity was flattered by customs which converted the right to
give a glass of water, to put on a dress, and to remove a basin, into
honourable prerogatives.
Princes thus accustomed to be treated as divinities naturally ended by
believing that they were of a distinct nature, of a purer essence than
the rest of mankind.
This sort of etiquette, which led our Princes to be treated in private as
idols, made them in public martyrs to decorum.  Marie Antoinette found in
the Chateau of Versailles a multitude of established customs which
appeared to her insupportable.
The ladies-in-waiting, who were all obliged to be sworn, and to wear full
Court dresses, were alone entitled to remain in the room, and to attend
in conjunction with the dame d’honneur and the tirewoman.  The Queen
abolished all this formality.  When her head was dressed, she curtsied to
all the ladies who were in her chamber, and, followed only by her own
women, went into her closet, where Mademoiselle Bertin, who could not be
admitted into the chamber, used to await her.  It was in this inner
closet that she produced her new and numerous dresses.  The Queen was
also desirous of being served by the most fashionable hairdresser in
Paris.  Now the custom which forbade all persons in inferior offices,
employed by royalty, to exert their talents for the public, was no doubt
intended to cut off all communication between the privacy of princes and
society at large; the latter being always extremely curious respecting
the most trifling particulars relative to the private life of the former.
The Queen, fearing that the taste of the hairdresser would suffer if he
should discontinue the general practice of his art, ordered him to attend
as usual certain ladies of the Court and of Paris; and this multiplied
the opportunities of learning details respecting the household, and very
often of misrepresenting them.
One of the customs most disagreeable to the Queen was that of dining
every day in public.  Maria Leczinska had always submitted to this
wearisome practice; Marie Antoinette followed it as long as she was
Dauphiness.  The Dauphin dined with her, and each branch of the family
had its public dinner daily.  The ushers suffered all decently dressed
people to enter; the sight was the delight of persons from the country.
At the dinner-hour there were none to be met upon the stairs but honest
folks, who, after having seen the Dauphiness take her soup, went to see
the Princes eat their ’bouilli’, and then ran themselves out of breath to
behold Mesdames at their dessert.
Very ancient usage, too, required that the Queens of France should appear
in public surrounded only by women; even at meal-times no persons of the
other sex attended to serve at table; and although the King ate publicly
with the Queen, yet he himself was served by women with everything which
was presented to him directly at table.  The dame d’honneur, kneeling,
for her own accommodation, upon a low stool, with a napkin upon her arm,
and four women in full dress, presented the plates to the King and Queen.
The dame d’honneur handed them drink.  This service had formerly been the
right of the maids of honour.  The Queen, upon her accession to the
throne, abolished the usage altogether.  She also freed herself from the
necessity of being followed in the Palace of Versailles by two of her
women in Court dresses, during those hours of the day when the ladies-in-
waiting were not with her.  From that time she was accompanied only by a
single valet de chambre and two footmen.  All the changes made by Marie
Antoinette were of the same description; a disposition gradually to
substitute the simple customs of Vienna for those of Versailles was more
injurious to her than she could possibly have imagined.
When the King slept in the Queen’s apartment he always rose before her;
the exact hour was communicated to the head femme de chambre, who
entered, preceded by a servant of the bedchamber bearing a taper; she
crossed the room and unbolted the door which separated the Queen’s
apartment from that of the King.  She there found the first valet de
chambre for the quarter, and a servant of the chamber.  They entered,
opened the bed curtains on the King’s side, and presented him slippers
generally, as well as the dressing-gown, which he put on, of gold or
silver stuff.  The first valet de chambre took down a short sword which
was always laid within the railing on the King’s side.  When the King
slept with the Queen, this sword was brought upon the armchair
appropriated to the King, and which was placed near the Queen’s bed,
within the gilt railing which surrounded the bed.  The first femme de
chambre conducted the King to the door, bolted it again, and, leaving the
Queen’s chamber, did not return until the hour appointed by her Majesty
the evening before.  At night the Queen went to bed before the King; the
first femme de chambre remained seated at the foot of her bed until the
arrival of his Majesty, in order, as in the morning, to see the King’s
attendants out and bolt the door after them.  The Queen awoke habitually
at eight o’clock, and breakfasted at nine, frequently in bed, and
sometimes after she had risen, at a table placed opposite her couch.
In order to describe the Queen’s private service intelligibly, it must be
recollected that service of every kind was honour, and had not any other
denomination.  To do the honours of the service was to present the
service to a person of superior rank, who happened to arrive at the
moment it was about to be performed.  Thus, supposing the Queen asked for
a glass of water, the servant of the chamber handed to the first woman a
silver gilt waiter, upon which were placed a covered goblet and a small
decanter; but should the lady of honour come in, the first woman was
obliged to present the waiter to her, and if Madame or the Comtesse
d’Artois came in at the moment, the waiter went again from the lady of
honour into the hands of the Princess before it reached the Queen.  It
must be observed, however, that if a princess of the blood instead of a
princess of the family entered, the service went directly from the first
woman to the princess of the blood, the lady of honour being excused from
transferring to any but princesses of the royal family.  Nothing was
presented directly to the Queen; her handkerchief or her gloves were
placed upon a long salver of gold or silver gilt, which was placed as a
piece of furniture of ceremony upon a side-table, and was called a
gantiere.  The first woman presented to her in this manner all that she
asked for, unless the tirewoman, the lady of honour, or a princess were
present, and then the gradation pointed out in the instance of the glass
of water was always observed.
Whether the Queen breakfasted in bed or up, those entitled to the petites
entrees were equally admitted; this privilege belonged of right to her
chief physician, chief surgeon, physician in ordinary, reader, closet
secretary, the King’s four first valets de chambre and their
reversioners, and the King’s chief physicians and surgeons.  There were
frequently from ten to twelve persons at this first entree.  The lady of
honour or the superintendent, if present, placed the breakfast equipage
upon the bed; the Princesse de Lamballe frequently performed that office.
As soon as the Queen rose, the wardrobe woman was admitted to take away
the pillows and prepare the bed to be made by some of the valets de
chambre.  She undrew the curtains, and the bed was not generally made
until the Queen was gone to mass.  Generally, excepting at St.  Cloud,
where the Queen bathed in an apartment below her own, a slipper bath was
rolled into her room, and her bathers brought everything that was
necessary for the bath.  The Queen bathed in a large gown of English
flannel buttoned down to the bottom;.  its sleeves throughout, as well as
the collar, were lined with linen.  When she came out of the bath the
first woman held up a cloth to conceal her entirely from the sight of her
women, and then threw it over her shoulders.  The bathers wrapped her in
it and dried her completely.  She then put on a long and wide open
chemise, entirely trimmed with lace, and afterwards a white taffety bed-
gown.  The wardrobe woman warmed the bed; the slippers were of dimity,
trimmed with lace.  Thus dressed, the Queen went to bed again, and the
bathers and servants of the chamber took away the bathing apparatus.  The
Queen, replaced in bed, took a book or her tapestry work.  On her bathing
mornings she breakfasted in the bath.  The tray was placed on the cover
of the bath.  These minute details are given here only to do justice to
the Queen’s scrupulous modesty.  Her temperance was equally remarkable;
she breakfasted on coffee or chocolate; at dinner ate nothing but white
meat, drank water only, and supped on broth, a wing of a fowl, and small
biscuits, which she soaked in a glass of water.
The tirewoman had under her order a principal under-tirewoman, charged
with the care and preservation of all the Queen’s dresses; two women to
fold and press such articles as required it; two valets, and a porter of
the wardrobe.  The latter brought every morning into the Queen’s
apartments baskets covered with taffety, containing all that she was to
wear during the day, and large cloths of green taffety covering the robes
and the full dresses.  The valet of the wardrobe on duty presented every
morning a large book to the first femme de chambre, containing patterns
of the gowns, full dresses, undresses, etc.  Every pattern was marked, to
show to which sort it belonged.  The first femme de chambre presented
this book to the Queen on her awaking, with a pincushion; her Majesty
stuck pins in those articles which she chose for the day,–one for the
dress, one for the afternoon-undress, and one for the full evening dress
for card or supper parties in the private apartments.  The book was then
taken back to the wardrobe, and all that was wanted for the day was soon
after brought in in large taffety wrappers.  The wardrobe woman, who had
the care of the linen, in her turn brought in a covered basket containing
two or three chemises and handkerchiefs.  The morning basket was called
pret du jour.  In the evening she brought in one containing the nightgown
and nightcap, and the stockings for the next morning; this basket was
called pret de la nuit.  They were in the department of the lady of
honour, the tirewoman having nothing to do with the linen.  Nothing was
put in order or taken care of by the Queen’s women.  As soon as the
toilet was over, the valets and porter belonging to the wardrobe were
called in, and they carried all away in a heap, in the taffety wrappers,
to the tirewoman’s wardrobe, where all were folded up again, hung up,
examined, and cleaned with so much regularity and care that even the
cast-off clothes scarcely looked as if they had been worn.  The
tirewoman’s wardrobe consisted of three large rooms surrounded with
closets, some furnished with drawers and others with shelves; there were
also large tables in each of these rooms, on which the gowns and dresses
were spread out and folded up.
For the winter the Queen had generally twelve full dresses, twelve
undresses called fancy dresses, and twelve rich hoop petticoats for the
card and supper parties in the smaller apartments.
She had as many for the summer; those for the spring served likewise for
the autumn.  All these dresses were discarded at the end of each season,
unless, indeed, she retained some that she particularly liked.  I am not
speaking of muslin or cambric gowns, or others of the same kind–they
were lately introduced; but such as these were not renewed at each
returning season, they were kept several years.  The chief women were
charged with the care and examination of the diamonds; this important
duty was formerly confided to the tirewoman, but for many years had been
included in the business of the first femmes de chambre.
The public toilet took place at noon.  The toilet-table was drawn forward
into the middle of the room.  This piece of furniture was generally the
richest and most ornamented of all in the apartment of the Princesses.
The Queen used it in the same manner and place for undressing herself in
the evening.  She went to bed in corsets trimmed with ribbon, and sleeves
trimmed with lace, and wore a large neck handkerchief.  The Queen’s
combing cloth was presented by her first woman if she was alone at the
commencement of the toilet; or, as well as the other articles, by the
ladies of honour if they were come.  At noon the women who had been in
attendance four and twenty hours were relieved by two women in full
dress; the first woman went also to dress herself.  The grandee entrees
were admitted during the toilet; sofas were placed in circles for the
superintendent, the ladies of honour, and tirewomen, and the governess of
the children of France when she came there; the duties of the ladies of
the bedchamber, having nothing to do with any kind of domestic or private
functions, did not begin until the hour of going out to mass; they waited
in the great closet, and entered when the toilet was over.  The Princes
of the blood, captains of the Guards, and all great officers having the
entry paid their court at the hour of the toilet.  The Queen saluted by
nodding her head or bending her body, or leaning upon her toilet-table as
if moving to rise; the last mode of salutation was for the Princes of the
blood.  The King’s brothers also came very generally to pay their
respects to her Majesty while her hair was being dressed.  In the earlier
years of the reign the first part of the dressing was performed in the
bedchamber and according to the laws of etiquette; that is to say, the
lady of honour put on the chemise and poured out the water for the hands,
the tirewoman put on the skirt of the gown or full dress, adjusted the
handkerchief, and tied on the necklace.  But when the young Queen became
more seriously devoted to fashion, and the head-dress attained so
extravagant a height that it became necessary to put on the chemise from
below,–when, in short, she determined to have her milliner, Mademoiselle
Benin, with her whilst she was dressing, whom the ladies would have
refused to admit to any share in the honour of attending on the Queen,
the dressing in the bedchamber was discontinued, and the Queen, leaving
her toilet, withdrew into her closet to dress.
On returning into her chamber, the Queen, standing about the middle of
it, surrounded by the superintendent, the ladies of honour and tirewomen,
her ladies of the palace, the chevalier d’honneur, the chief equerry, her
clergy ready to attend her to mass, and the Princesses of the royal
family who happened to come, accompanied by all their chief attendants
and ladies, passed in order into the gallery as in going to mass.  The
Queen’s signatures were generally given at the moment of entry into the
chamber.  The secretary for orders presented the pen.  Presentations of
colonels on taking leave were usually made at this time.  Those of
ladies, and, such as had a right to the tabouret, or sitting in the royal
presence, were made on Sunday evenings before card-playing began, on
their coming in from paying their respects.  Ambassadors were introduced
to the Queen on Tuesday mornings, accompanied by the introducer of
ambassadors on duty, and by M. de Sequeville, the secretary for the
ambassadors.  The introducer in waiting usually came to the Queen at her
toilet to apprise her of the presentations of foreigners which would be
made.  The usher of the chamber, stationed at the entrance, opened the
folding doors to none but the Princes and Princesses of the royal family,
and announced them aloud.  Quitting his post, he came forward to name to
the lady of honour the persons who came to be presented, or who came to
take leave; that lady again named them to the Queen at the moment they
saluted her; if she and the tirewoman were absent, the first woman took
the place and did that duty.  The ladies of the bedchamber, chosen solely
as companions for the Queen, had no domestic duties to fulfil, however
opinion might dignify such offices.  The King’s letter in appointing
them, among other instructions of etiquette, ran thus: “having chosen you
to bear the Queen company.”  There were hardly any emoluments accruing
from this place.
The Queen heard mass with the King in the tribune, facing the grand altar
and the choir, with the exception of the days of high ceremony, when
their chairs were placed below upon velvet carpets fringed with gold.
These days were marked by the name of grand chapel day.
The Queen named the collector beforehand, and informed her of it through
her lady of honour, who was besides desired to send the purse to her.
The collectors were almost always chosen from among those who had been
recently presented.  After returning from mass the Queen dined every
Sunday with the King only, in public in the cabinet of the nobility, a
room leading to her chamber.  Titled ladies having the honours sat during
the dinner upon folding-chairs placed on each side of the table.  Ladies
without titles stood round the table; the captain of the Guards and the
first gentleman of the chamber were behind the King’s chair; behind that
of the Queen were her first maitre d’hotel, her chevalier d’honneur, and
the chief equerry.  The Queen’s maitre d’hotel was furnished with a large
staff, six or seven feet in length, ornamented with golden fleurs-de-lis,
and surmounted by fleurs-de-lis in the form of a crown.  He entered the
room with this badge of his office to announce that the Queen was served.
The comptroller put into his hands the card of the dinner; in the absence
of the maitre d’hotel he presented it to the Queen himself, otherwise he
only did him the honours of the service.  The maitre d’hotel did not
leave his place, he merely gave the orders for serving up and removing;
the comptroller and gentlemen serving placed the various dishes upon the
table, receiving them from the inferior servants.
The Prince nearest to the crown presented water to wash the King’s hands
at the moment he placed himself at table, and a princess did the same
service to the Queen.
The table service was formerly performed for the Queen by the lady of
honour and four women in full dress; this part of the women’s service was
transferred to them on the suppression of the office of maids of honour.
The Queen put an end to this etiquette in the first year of her reign.
When the dinner was over the Queen returned without the King to her
apartment with her women, and took off her hoop and train.
This unfortunate Princess, against whom the opinions of the French people
were at length so much excited, possessed qualities which deserved to
obtain the greatest popularity.  None could doubt this who, like myself,
had heard her with delight describe the patriarchal manners of the House
of Lorraine.  She was accustomed to say that, by transplanting their
manners into Austria, the Princes of that house had laid the foundation
of the unassailable popularity enjoyed by the imperial family.  She
frequently related to me the interesting manner in which the Ducs de
Lorraine levied the taxes.  “The sovereign Prince,” said she, “went to
church; after the sermon he rose, waved his hat in the air, to show that
he was about to speak, and then mentioned the sum whereof he stood in
need.  Such was the zeal of the good Lorrainers that men have been known
to take away linen or household utensils without the knowledge of their
wives, and sell them to add the value to their contribution.  It
sometimes happened, too, that the Prince received more money than he had
asked for, in which case he restored the surplus.”
All who were acquainted with the Queen’s private qualities knew that she
equally deserved attachment and esteem.  Kind and patient to excess in
her relations with her household, she indulgently considered all around
her, and interested herself in their fortunes and in their pleasures.,
She had, among her women, young girls from the Maison de St. Cyr, all
well born; the Queen forbade them the play when the performances were not
suitable; sometimes, when old plays were to be represented, if she found
she could not with certainty trust to her memory, she would take the
trouble to read them in the morning, to enable her to decide whether the
girls should or should not go to see them,–rightly considering herself
bound to watch over their morals and conduct.
During the first few months of his reign Louis XVI. dwelt at La Muette,
Marly, and Compiegne.  When settled at Versailles he occupied himself
with a general examination of his grandfather’s papers.  He had promised
the Queen to communicate to her all that he might discover relative to
the history of the man with the iron mask, who, he thought, had become so
inexhaustible a source of conjecture only in consequence of the interest
which the pen of a celebrated writer had excited respecting the detention
of a prisoner of State, who was merely a man of whimsical tastes and
habits.
I was with the Queen when the King, having finished his researches,
informed her that he had not found anything among the secret papers
elucidating the existence of this prisoner; that he had conversed on the
matter with M. de Maurepas, whose age made him contemporary with the
epoch during which the story must have been known to the ministers;
and that M. de Maurepas had assured him he was merely a prisoner of a
very dangerous character, in consequence of his disposition for intrigue.
He was a subject of the Duke of Mantua, and was enticed to the frontier,
arrested there, and kept prisoner, first at Pignerol, and afterwards in
the Bastille.  This transfer took place in consequence of the appointment
of the governor of the former place to the government of the latter.
It was for fear the prisoner should profit by the inexperience of a new
governor that he was sent with the Governor of Pignerol to the Bastille.
Such was, in fact, the truth about the man on whom people have been
pleased to fix an iron mask.  And thus was it related in writing, and
published by M. ––- twenty years ago.  He had searched the archives of
the Foreign Office, and laid the real story before the public; but the
public, prepossessed in favour of a marvellous version, would not
acknowledge the authenticity of his account.  Every man relied upon the
authority of Voltaire; and it was believed that a natural or a twin
brother of Louis XIV. lived many years in prison with a mask over his
face.  The story of this mask, perhaps, had its origin in the old custom,
among both men and women in Italy, of wearing a velvet mask when they
exposed themselves to the sun.  It is possible that the Italian captive
may have sometimes shown himself upon the terrace of his prison with his
face thus covered.  As to the silver plate which this celebrated prisoner
is said to have thrown from his window, it is known that such a
circumstance did happen, but it happened at Valzin, in the time of
Cardinal Richelieu.  This anecdote has been mixed up with the inventions
respecting the Piedmontese prisoner.
In this survey of the papers of Louis XV. by his grandson some very
curious particulars relative to his private treasury were found.  Shares
in various financial companies afforded him a revenue, and had in course
of time produced him a capital of some amount, which he applied to his
secret expenses.  The King collected his vouchers of title to these
shares, and made a present of them to M. Thierry de Ville d’Avray, his
chief valet de chambre.
The Queen was desirous to secure the comfort of Mesdames, the daughters
of Louis XV., who were held in the highest respect.  About this period
she contributed to furnish them with a revenue sufficient to provide them
an easy, pleasant existence: The King gave them the Chateau of Bellevue;
and added to the produce of it, which was given up to them, the expenses
of their table and equipage, and payment of all the charges of their
household, the number of which was even increased.  During the lifetime
of Louis XV., who was a very selfish prince, his daughters, although they
had attained forty years of age, had no other place of residence than
their apartments in the Chateau of Versailles; no other walks than such
as they could take in the large park of that palace; and no other means
of gratifying their taste for the cultivation of plants but by having
boxes and vases, filled with them, in their balconies or their closets.
They had, therefore, reason to be much pleased with the conduct of Marie
Antoinette, who had the greatest influence in the King’s kindness towards
his aunts.
Paris did not cease, during the first years of the reign, to give proofs
of pleasure whenever the Queen appeared at any of the plays of the
capital.  At the representation of “Iphigenia in Aulis,” the actor who
sang the words, “Let us sing, let us celebrate our Queen!”  which were
repeated by the chorus, directed by a respectful movement the eyes of the
whole assembly upon her Majesty.  Reiterated cries of ’Bis’! and clapping
of hands, were followed by such a burst of enthusiasm that many of the
audience added their voices to those of the actors in order to celebrate,
it might too truly be said, another Iphigenia.  The Queen, deeply
affected, covered her eyes with her handkerchief; and this proof of
sensibility raised the public enthusiasm to a still higher pitch.
The King gave Marie Antoinette Petit Trianon.
     [The Chateau of Petit Trianon, which was built for Louis XV., was
     not remarkably handsome as a building.  The luxuriance of the
     hothouses rendered the place agreeable to that Prince.  He spent a
     few days there several times in the year.  It was when he was
     setting off from Versailles for Petit Trianon that he was struck in
     the side by the knife of Damiens, and it was there that he was
     attacked by the smallpox, of which he died on the 10th of May,
     1774.–MADAME CAMPAN.]
Henceforward she amused herself with improving the gardens, without
allowing any addition to the building, or any change in the furniture,
which was very shabby, and remained, in 1789, in the same state as during
the reign of Louis XV.  Everything there, without exception, was
preserved; and the Queen slept in a faded bed, which had been used by the
Comtesse du Barry.  The charge of extravagance, generally made against
the Queen, is the most unaccountable of all the popular errors respecting
her character.  She had exactly the contrary failing; and I could prove
that she often carried her economy to a degree of parsimony actually
blamable, especially in a sovereign.  She took a great liking for
Trianon, and used to go there alone, followed by a valet; but she found
attendants ready to receive her,–a concierge and his wife, who served
her as femme de chambre, women of the wardrobe, footmen, etc.
When she first took possession of Petit Trianon, it was reported that she
changed the name of the seat which the King had given her, and called it
Little Vienna, or Little Schoenbrunn.  A person who belonged to the
Court, and was silly enough to give this report credit, wishing to visit
Petit Trianon with a party, wrote to M. Campan, requesting the Queen’s
permission to do so.  In his note he called Trianon Little Vienna.
Similar requests were usually laid before the Queen just as they were
made: she chose to give the permissions to see her gardens herself,
liking to grant these little favours.  When she came to the words I have
quoted she was very, much offended, and exclaimed, angrily, that there
were too many, fools ready, to aid the malicious; that she had been told
of the report circulated, which pretended that she had thought of nothing
but her own country, and that she kept an Austrian heart, while the
interests of France alone ought to engage her.  She refused the request
so awkwardly made, and desired M. Campan to reply, that Trianon was not
to be seen for some time, and that the Queen was astonished that any man
in good society should believe she would do so ill-judged a thing as to
change the French names of her palaces to foreign ones.
Before the Emperor Joseph II’s first visit to France the Queen received a
visit from the Archduke Maximilian in 1775.  A stupid act of the
ambassador, seconded on the part of the Queen by the Abbe de Vermond,
gave rise at that period to a discussion which offended the Princes of
the blood and the chief nobility of the kingdom.  Travelling incognito,
the young Prince claimed that the first visit was not due from him to the
Princes of the blood; and the Queen supported his pretension.
From the time of the Regency, and on account of the residence of the
family of Orleans in the bosom of the capital, Paris had preserved a
remarkable degree of attachment and respect for that branch of the royal
house; and although the crown was becoming more and more remote from the
Princes of the House of Orleans, they had the advantage (a great one with
the Parisians) of being the descendants of Henri IV.  An affront to that
popular family was a serious ground of dislike to the Queen.  It was at
this period that the circles of the city, and even of the Court,
expressed themselves bitterly about her levity, and her partiality for
the House of Austria.  The Prince for whom the Queen had embarked in an
important family quarrel–and a quarrel involving national prerogatives–
was, besides, little calculated to inspire interest.  Still young,
uninformed, and deficient in natural talent, he was always making
blunders.
He went to the Jardin du Roi; M. de Buffon, who received him there,
offered him a copy of his works; the Prince declined accepting the book,
saying to M. de Buffon, in the most polite manner possible, “I should be
very sorry to deprive you of it.”
     [Joseph II, on his visit to France, also went to see M. de Buffon,
     and said to that celebrated man, “I am come to fetch the copy of
     your works which my brother forgot."–NOTE BY THE EDITOR.]
It may be supposed that the Parisians were much entertained with this
answer.
The Queen was exceedingly mortified at the mistakes made by her brother;
but what hurt her most was being accused of preserving an Austrian heart.
Marie Antoinette had more than once to endure that imputation during the
long course of her misfortunes.  Habit did not stop the tears such
injustice caused; but the first time she was suspected of not loving
France, she gave way to her indignation.  All that she could say on the
subject was useless; by seconding the pretensions of the Archduke she had
put arms into her enemies’ hands; they were labouring to deprive her of
the love of the people, and endeavoured, by all possible means, to spread
a belief that the Queen sighed for Germany, and preferred that country to
France.
Marie Antoinette had none but herself to rely on for preserving the
fickle smiles of the Court and the public.  The King, too indifferent to
serve her as a guide, as yet had conceived no love for her,
notwithstanding the intimacy that grew between them at Choisy.  In his
closet Louis XVI. was immersed in deep study.  At the Council he was
busied with the welfare of his people; hunting and mechanical occupations
engrossed his leisure moments, and he never thought on the subject of an
heir.
The coronation took place at Rheims, with all the accustomed pomp.  At
this period the people’s love for Louis XVI.  burst forth in transports
not to be mistaken for party demonstrations or idle curiosity.  He
replied to this enthusiasm by marks of confidence, worthy of a people
happy in being governed by a good King; he took a pleasure in repeatedly
walking without guards, in the midst of the crowd which pressed around
him, and called down blessings on his head.  I remarked the impression
made at this time by an observation of Louis XVI.  On the day of his
coronation he put his hand up to his head, at the moment of the crown
being placed upon it, and said, “It pinches me.”  Henri III. had
exclaimed, “It pricks me.”  Those who were near the King were struck with
the similarity between these two exclamations, though not of a class
likely to be blinded by the superstitious fears of ignorance.
While the Queen, neglected as she was, could not even hope for the
happiness of being a mother, she had the mortification of seeing the
Comtesse d’Artois give birth to the Duc d’Angouleme.
Custom required that the royal family and the whole Court should be
present at the accouchement of the Princesses; the Queen was therefore
obliged to stay a whole day in her sister-in-law’s chamber.  The moment
the Comtesse d’Artois was informed a prince was born, she put her hand to
her forehead and exclaimed with energy, “My God, how happy I am!”  The
Queen felt very differently at this involuntary and natural exclamation.
Nevertheless, her behaviour was perfect.  She bestowed all possible marks
of tenderness upon the young mother, and would not leave her until she
was again put into bed; she afterwards passed along the staircase, and
through the hall of the guards, with a calm demeanour, in the midst of an
immense crowd.  The poissardes, who had assumed a right of speaking to
sovereigns in their own vulgar language, followed her to the very doors
of her apartments, calling out to her with gross expressions, that she
ought to produce heirs.  The Queen reached her inner room, hurried and
agitated; he shut herself up to weep with me alone, not from jealousy of
her sister-in-law’s happiness,–of that he was incapable,–but from
sorrow at her own situation.
Deprived of the happiness of giving an heir to the crown, the Queen
endeavoured to interest herself in the children of the people of her
household.  She had long been desirous to bring up one of them herself,
and to make it the constant object of her care.  A little village boy,
four or five years old, full of health, with a pleasing countenance,
remarkably large blue eyes, and fine light hair, got under the feet of
the Queen’s horses, when she was taking an airing in a calash, through
the hamlet of St. Michel, near Louveciennes.  The coachman and postilions
stopped the horses, and the child was rescued without the slightest
injury.  Its grandmother rushed out of the door of her cottage to take
it; but the Queen, standing up in her calash and extending her arms,
called out that the child was hers, and that destiny had given it to her,
to console her, no doubt, until she should have the happiness of having
one herself.  “Is his mother alive?” asked the Queen.  “No, Madame; my
daughter died last winter, and left five small children upon my hands."
"I will take this one, and provide for all the rest; do you consent?"
"Ah, Madame, they are too fortunate,” replied the cottager; “but Jacques
is a bad boy.  I hope he will stay with you!”  The Queen, taking little
Jacques upon her knee, said that she would make him used to her, and gave
orders to proceed.  It was necessary, however, to shorten the drive, so
violently did Jacques scream, and kick the Queen and her ladies.
The arrival of her Majesty at her apartments at Versailles, holding the
little rustic by the hand, astonished the whole household; he cried out
with intolerable shrillness that he wanted his grandmother, his brother
Louis, and his sister Marianne; nothing could calm him.  He was taken
away by the wife of a servant, who was appointed to attend him as nurse.
The other children were put to school.  Little Jacques, whose family name
was Armand, came back to the Queen two days afterwards; a white frock
trimmed with lace, a rose-coloured sash with silver fringe, and a hat
decorated with feathers, were now substituted for the woollen cap, the
little red frock, and the wooden shoes.  The child was really very
beautiful.  The Queen was enchanted with him; he was brought to her every
morning at nine o’clock; he breakfasted and dined with her, and often
even with the King.  She liked to call him my child,
     [This little unfortunate was nearly twenty in 1792; the fury of the
     people and the fear of being thought a favourite of the Queen’s had
     made him the most sanguinary terrorist of Versailles.  He was killed
     at the battle of Jemappes.]
and lavished caresses upon him, still maintaining a deep silence
respecting the regrets which constantly occupied her heart.
This child remained with the Queen until the time when Madame was old
enough to come home to her august mother, who had particularly taken upon
herself the care of her education.
The Queen talked incessantly of the qualities which she admired in Louis
XVI., and gladly attributed to herself the slightest favourable change in
his manner; perhaps she displayed too unreservedly the joy she felt, and
the share she appropriated in the improvement.  One day Louis XVI.
saluted her ladies with more kindness than usual, and the Queen
laughingly said to them, “Now confess, ladies, that for one so badly
taught as a child, the King has saluted you with very good grace!”
The Queen hated M. de La Vauguyon; she accused him alone of those points
in the habits, and even the sentiments, of the King which hurt her.
A former first woman of the bedchamber to Queen Maria Leczinska had
continued in office near the young Queen.  She was one of those people
who are fortunate enough to spend their lives in the service of kings
without knowing anything of what is passing at Court.  She was a great
devotee; the Abbe Grisel, an ex-Jesuit, was her director.  Being rich
from her savings and an income of 50,000 livres, she kept a very good
table; in her apartment, at the Grand Commun, the most distinguished
persons who still adhered to the Order of Jesuits often assembled.  The
Duc de La Vauguyon was intimate with her; their chairs at the Eglise des
Reollets were placed near each other; at high mass and at vespers they
sang the “Gloria in Excelsis” and the “Magnificat” together; and the
pious virgin, seeing in him only one of God’s elect, little imagined him
to be the declared enemy of a Princess whom she served and revered.
On the day of his death she ran in tears to relate to the Queen the
piety, humility, and repentance of the last moments of the Duc de La
Vauguyon.  He had called his people together, she said, to ask their
pardon.  “For what?”  replied the Queen, sharply; “he has placed and
pensioned off all his servants; it was of the King and his brothers that
the holy man you bewail should have asked pardon, for having paid so
little attention to the education of princes on whom the fate and
happiness of twenty-five millions of men depend.  Luckily,” added she,
"the King and his brothers, still young, have incessantly laboured to
repair the errors of their preceptor.”
The progress of time, and the confidence with which the King and the
Princes, his brothers, were inspired by the change in their situation
since the death of Louis XV., had developed their characters.  I will
endeavour to depict them.
The features of Louis XVI.  were noble enough, though somewhat melancholy
in expression; his walk was heavy and unmajestic; his person greatly
neglected; his hair, whatever might be the skill of his hairdresser,
was soon in disorder.  His voice, without being harsh, was not agreeable;
if he grew animated in speaking he often got above his natural pitch,
and became shrill.  The Abbe de Radonvilliers, his preceptor, one of the
Forty of the French Academy, a learned and amiable man, had given him and
Monsieur a taste for study.  The King had continued to instruct himself;
he knew the English language perfectly; I have often heard him translate
some of the most difficult passages in Milton’s poems.  He was a skilful
geographer, and was fond of drawing and colouring maps; he was well
versed in history, but had not perhaps sufficiently studied the spirit of
it.  He appreciated dramatic beauties, and judged them accurately.  At
Choisy, one day, several ladies expressed their dissatisfaction because
the French actors were going to perform one of Moliere’s pieces.  The
King inquired why they disapproved of the choice.  One of them answered
that everybody must admit that Moliere had very bad taste; the King
replied that many things might be found in Moliere contrary to fashion,
but that it appeared to him difficult to point out any in bad taste?
     [The King, having purchased the Chateau of Rambouillet from the Duc
     de Penthievre, amused himself with embellishing it.  I have seen a
     register entirely in his own handwriting, which proves that he
     possessed a great variety of information on the minutiae of various
     branches of knowledge.  In his accounts he would not omit an outlay
     of a franc.  His figures and letters, when he wished to write
     legibly, were small and very neat, but in general he wrote very ill.
     He was so sparing of paper that he divided a sheet into eight, six,
     or four pieces, according to the length of what he had to write.
     Towards the close of the page he compressed the letters, and avoided
     interlineations.  The last words were close to the edge of the
     paper; he seemed to regret being obliged to begin another page.  He
     was methodical and analytical; he divided what he wrote into
     chapters and sections.  He had extracted from the works of Nicole
     and Fenelon, his favourite authors, three or four hundred concise
     and sententious phrases; these he had classed according to subject,
     and formed a work of them in the style of Montesquieu.  To this
     treatise he had given the following general title: “Of Moderate
     Monarchy” (De la Monarchie temperee), with chapters entitled, “Of
     the Person of the Prince;”  “Of the Authority of Bodies in the
     State;”  “Of the Character of the Executive Functions of the
     Monarchy.”  Had he been able to carry into effect all the grand
     precepts he had observed in Fenelon, Louis XVI. would have been an
     accomplished monarch, and France a powerful kingdom.  The King used
     to accept the speeches his ministers presented to him to deliver on
     important occasions; but he corrected and modified them; struck out
     some parts, and added others; and sometimes consulted the Queen on
     the subject.  The phrase of the minister erased by the King was
     frequently unsuitable, and dictated by the minister’s private
     feelings; but the King’s was always the natural expression.  He
     himself composed, three times or oftener, his famous answers to the
     Parliament which he banished.  But in his letters he was negligent,
     and always incorrect.  Simplicity was the characteristic of the
     King’s style; the figurative style of M. Necker did not please him;
     the sarcasms of Maurepas were disagreeable to him.  Unfortunate
     Prince! he would predict, in his observations, that if such a
     calamity should happen, the monarchy would be ruined; and the next
     day he would consent in Council to the very measure which he had
     condemned the day before, and which brought him nearer the brink of
     the precipice.–SOULAVIE, “Historical and Political Memoirs of the
     Reign of Louis XVI.,” vol.  ii.]
This Prince combined with his attainments the attributes of a good
husband, a tender father, and an indulgent master.
Unfortunately he showed too much predilection for the mechanical arts;
masonry and lock-making so delighted him that he admitted into his
private apartment a common locksmith, with whom he made keys and locks;
and his hands, blackened by that sort of work, were often, in my
presence, the subject of remonstrances and even sharp reproaches from
the Queen, who would have chosen other amusements for her husband.?
     [Louis XVI. saw that the art of lock-making was capable of
     application to a higher study, He was an excellent geographer.  The
     most valuable and complete instrument for the study of that science
     was begun by his orders and under his direction.  It was an immense
     globe of copper, which was long preserved, though unfinished, in the
     Mazarine library.  Louis XVI.  invented and had executed under his
     own eyes the ingenious mechanism required for this globe.–NOTE BY
     THE EDITOR.]
Austere and rigid with regard to himself alone, the King observed the
laws of the Church with scrupulous exactness.  He fasted and abstained
throughout the whole of Lent.  He thought it right that the queen should
not observe these customs with the same strictness.  Though sincerely
pious, the spirit of the age had disposed his mind to toleration.
Turgot, Malesherbes, and Necker judged that this Prince, modest and
simple in his habits, would willingly sacrifice the royal prerogative to
the solid greatness of his people.  His heart, in truth, disposed him
towards reforms; but his prejudices and fears, and the clamours of pious
and privileged persons, intimidated him, and made him abandon plans which
his love for the people had suggested.
Monsieur–
     [During his stay at Avignon, Monsieur, afterwards Louis XVIII,
     lodged with the Duc de Crillon; he refused the town-guard which was
     offered him, saying, “A son of France, under the roof of a Crillon,
     needs no guard."–NOTE BY THE EDITOR.]
had more dignity of demeanour than the King; but his corpulence rendered
his gait inelegant.  He was fond of pageantry and magnificence.  He
cultivated the belles lettres, and under assumed names often contributed
verses to the Mercury and other papers.
His wonderful memory was the handmaid of his wit, furnishing him with the
happiest quotations.  He knew by heart a varied repertoire, from the
finest passages of the Latin classics to the Latin of all the prayers,
from the works of Racine to the vaudeville of “Rose et Colas.”
The Comte d’Artoisi had an agreeable countenance, was well made, skilful
in bodily exercises, lively, impetuous, fond of pleasure, and very
particular in his dress.  Some happy observations made by him were
repeated with approval, and gave a favourable idea of his heart.  The
Parisians liked the open and frank character of this Prince, which they
considered national, and showed real affection for him.
The dominion that the Queen gained over the King’s mind, the charms of a
society in which Monsieur displayed his wit, and to which the Comte
d’Artois–[Afterwards Charles X.]– gave life by the vivacity of youth,
gradually softened that ruggedness of manner in Louis XVI. which a
better-conducted education might have prevented.  Still, this defect
often showed itself, and, in spite of his extreme simplicity, the King
inspired those who had occasion to speak to him with diffidence.
Courtiers, submissive in the presence of their sovereign, are only the
more ready to caricature him; with little good breeding, they called
those answers they so much dreaded, Les coups de boutoir du Roi.–[The
literal meaning of the phrase “coup de boutoir,” is a thrust from the
snout of a boar.]
Methodical in all his habits, the King always went to bed at eleven
precisely.  One evening the Queen was going with her usual circle to a
party, either at the Duc de Duras’s or the Princesse de Glumenee’s.
The hand of the clock was slily put forward to hasten the King’s
departure by a few minutes; he thought bed-time was come, retired, and
found none of his attendants ready to wait on him.  This joke became
known in all the drawing-rooms of Versailles, and was disapproved of
there.  Kings have no privacy.  Queens have no boudoirs.  If those who
are in immediate attendance upon sovereigns be not themselves disposed to
transmit their private habits to posterity, the meanest valet will relate
what he has seen or heard; his gossip circulates rapidly, and forms
public opinion, which at length ascribes to the most august persons
characters which, however untrue they may be, are almost always
indelible.
NOTE.  The only passion ever shown by Louis XVI. was for hunting.  He was
so much occupied by it that when I went up into his private closets at
Versailles, after the 10th of August, I saw upon the staircase six
frames, in which were seen statements of all his hunts, when Dauphin and
when King.  In them was detailed the number, kind, and quality of
the game he had killed at each hunting party during every month, every
season, and every year of his reign.
The interior of his private apartments was thus arranged: a salon,
ornamented with gilded mouldings, displayed the engravings which had been
dedicated to him, drawings of the canals he had dug, with the model of
that of Burgundy, and the plan of the cones and works of Cherbourg.  The
upper hall contained his collection of geographical charts, spheres,
globes, and also his geographical cabinet.  There were to be seen
drawings of maps which he had begun, and some that he had finished.  He
had a clever method of washing them in.  His geographical memory was
prodigious.  Over the hall was the turning and joining room, furnished
with ingenious instruments for working in wood.  He inherited some from
Louis XV., and he often busied himself, with Duret’s assistance, in
keeping them clean and bright.  Above was the library of books published
during his reign.  The prayer books and manuscript books of Anne of
Brittany, Francois I, the later Valois, Louis XIV., Louis XV., and the
Dauphin formed the great hereditary library of the Chateau.  Louis XVI.
placed separately, in two apartments communicating with each other, the
works of his own time, including a complete collection of Didot’s
editions, in vellum, every volume enclosed in a morocco case.  There were
several English works, among the rest the debates of the British
Parliament, in a great number of volumes in folio (this is the Moniteur
of England, a complete collection of which is so valuable and so scarce).
By the side of this collection was to be seen a manuscript history of all
the schemes for a descent upon that island, particularly that of Comte de
Broglie.  One of the presses of this cabinet was full of cardboard boxes,
containing papers relative to the House of Austria, inscribed in the
King’s own hand: “Secret papers of my family respecting the House of
Austria; papers of my family respecting the Houses of Stuart and
Hanover.”  In an adjoining press were kept papers relative to Russia.
Satirical works against Catherine II.  and against Paul I.  were sold in
France under the name of histories; Louis XVIII. collected and sealed up
with his small seal the scandalous anecdotes against Catherine II., as
well as the works of Rhulieres, of which he had a copy, to be certain
that the secret life of that Princess, which attracted the curiosity of
her contemporaries, should not be made public by his means.
Above the King’s private library were a forge, two anvils, and a vast
number of iron tools; various common locks, well made and perfect; some
secret locks, and locks ornamented with gilt copper.  It was there that
the infamous Gamin, who afterwards accused the King of having tried to
poison him, and was rewarded for his calumny with a pension of twelve
thousand livres, taught him the art of lock-making.  This Gamin, who
became our guide, by order of the department and municipality of
Versailles, did not, however, denounce the King on the 20th December,
1792.  He had been made the confidant of that Prince in an immense number
of important commissions; the King had sent him the “Red Book,” from
Paris, in a parcel; and the part which was concealed during the
Constituent Assembly still remained so in 1793.  Gamin hid it in a part
of the Chateau inaccessible to everybody, and took it from under the
shelves of a secret press before our eyes.  This is a convincing proof
that Louis XVI. hoped to return to his Chiteau.  When teaching Louis XVI.
his trade Gamin took upon himself the tone and authority of a master.
"The King was good, forbearing, timid, inquisitive, and addicted to
sleep,” said Gamin to me; “he was fond to excess of lock-making, and he
concealed himself from the Queen and the Court to file and forge with me.
In order to convey his anvil and my own backwards and forwards we were
obliged to use a thousand stratagems, the history of which would: never
end.”  Above the King’s and Gamin’s forges and anvils was an,
observatory, erected upon a platform covered with lead.  There, seated on
an armchair, and assisted by a telescope, the King observed all that was
passing in the courtyards of Versailles, the avenue of Paris, and the
neighbouring gardens.  He had taken a liking to Duret, one of the indoor
servants of the palace, who sharpened his tools, cleaned his anvils,
pasted his maps, and adjusted eyeglasses to the King’s sight, who was
short-sighted.  This good Duret, and indeed all the indoor servants,
spoke of their master with regret and affection, and with tears in their
eyes.
The King was born weak and delicate; but from the age of twenty-four he
possessed a robust constitution, inherited from his mother, who was of
the House of Saxe, celebrated for generations for its robustness.  There
were two men in Louis XVI., the man of knowledge and the man of will.
The King knew the history of his own family and of the first houses of
France perfectly.  He composed the instructions for M. de la Peyrouse’s
voyage round the world, which the minister thought were drawn up by
several members of the Academy of Sciences.  His memory retained an
infinite number of names and situations.  He remembered quantities and
numbers wonderfully.  One day an account was presented to him in which
the minister had ranked among the expenses an item inserted in the
account of the preceding year.  “There is a double charge,” said the
King; “bring me last year’s account, and I will show it yet there.”  When
the King was perfectly master of the details of any matter, and saw
injustice, he was obdurate even to harshness.  Then he would be obeyed
instantly, in order to be sure that he was obeyed.
But in important affairs of state the man of will was not to be found.
Louis XVI. was upon the throne exactly what those weak temperaments whom
nature has rendered incapable of an opinion are in society.  In his
pusillanimity, he gave his confidence to a minister; and although amidst
various counsels he often knew which was the best, he never had the
resolution to say, “I prefer the opinion of such a one.”  Herein
originated the misfortunes of the State.–SOULAVIE’S “Historical and
Political Memoirs Of the Reign Of LOUIS XVI.,” VOL ii.
The winter following the confinement of the Comtesse d’Artois was very
severe; the recollections of the pleasure which sleighing-parties had
given the Queen in her childhood made her wish to introduce similar ones
in France.  This amusement had already been known in that Court, as was
proved by sleighs being found in the stables which had been used by the
Dauphin, the father of Louis XVI.  Some were constructed for the Queen in
a more modern style.  The Princes also ordered several; and in a few days
there was a tolerable number of these vehicles.  They were driven by the
princes and noblemen of the Court.  The noise of the bells and balls with
which the harness of the horses was furnished, the elegance and whiteness
of their plumes, the varied forms of the carriages, the gold with which
they were all ornamented, rendered these parties delightful to the eye.
The winter was very favourable to them, the snow remaining on the ground
nearly six weeks; the drives in the park afforded a pleasure shared by
the spectators.
     [Louis XVI., touched with the wretched condition of the poor of
     Versailles during the winter of 1776, had several cart-loads of wood
     distributed among them.  Seeing one day a file of those vehicles
     passing by, while several noblemen were preparing to be drawn
     swiftly over the ice, he uttered these memorable words: “Gentlemen,
     here are my sleighs!"–NOTE BY THE EDITOR.]
No one imagined that any blame could attach to so innocent an amusement.
But the party were tempted to extend their drives as far as the Champs
Elysees; a few sleighs even crossed the boulevards; the ladies being
masked, the Queen’s enemies took the opportunity of saying that she had
traversed the streets of Paris in a sleigh.
This became a matter of moment.  The public discovered in it a
predilection for the habits of Vienna; but all that Marie Antoinette did
was criticised.
Sleigh-driving, savouring of the Northern Courts, had no favour among the
Parisians.  The Queen was informed of this; and although all the sleighs
were preserved, and several subsequent winters lent themselves to the
amusement, she would not resume it.
It was at the time of the sleighing-parties that the Queen became
intimately acquainted with the Princesse de Lamballe, who made her
appearance in them wrapped in fur, with all the brilliancy and freshness
of the age of twenty,–the emblem of spring, peeping from under sable and
ermine.  Her situation, moreover, rendered her peculiarly interesting;
married, when she was scarcely past childhood, to a young prince, who
ruined himself by the contagious example of the Duc d’Orleans, she had
had nothing to do from the time of her arrival in France but to weep.
A widow at eighteen, and childless, she lived with the Duc de Penthievre
as an adopted daughter.  She had the tenderest respect and attachment for
that venerable Prince; but the Queen, though doing justice to his
virtues, saw that the Duc de Penthievre’s way of life, whether at Paris
or at his country-seat, could neither afford his young daughter-in-law
the amusements suited to her time of life, nor ensure her in the future
an establishment such as she was deprived of by her widowhood.  She
determined, therefore, to establish her at Versailles; and for her sake
revived the office of superintendent, which had been discontinued at
Court since the death of Mademoiselle de Clermont.  It is said that Maria
Leczinska had decided that this place should continue vacant, the
superintendent having so extensive a power in the houses of queens as to
be frequently a restraint upon their inclinations.  Differences which
soon took place between Marie Antoinette and the Princesse de Lamballe
respecting the official prerogatives of the latter, proved that the wife
of Louis XV. had acted judiciously in abolishing the office; but a kind
of treaty made between the Queen and the Princess smoothed all
difficulties.  The blame for too strong an assertion of claims fell upon
a secretary of the superintendent, who had been her adviser; and
everything was so arranged that a firm friendship existed between these
two Princesses down to the disastrous period which terminated their
career.
Notwithstanding the enthusiasm which the splendour, grace, and kindness
of the Queen generally inspired, secret intrigues continued in operation
against her.  A short time after the ascension of Louis XVI. to the
throne, the minister of the King’s household was informed that a most
offensive libel against the Queen was about to appear.  The lieutenant of
police deputed a man named Goupil, a police inspector, to trace this
libel; he came soon after to say that he had found out the place where
the work was being printed, and that it was at a country house near
Yverdun.  He had already got possession of two sheets, which contained
the most atrocious calumnies, conveyed with a degree of art which might
make them very dangerous to the Queen’s reputation.  Goupil said that he
could obtain the rest, but that he should want a considerable sum for
that purpose.  Three thousand Louis were given him, and very soon
afterwards he brought the whole manuscript and all that had been printed
to the lieutenant of police.  He received a thousand louis more as a
reward for his address and zeal; and a much more important office was
about to be given him, when another spy, envious of Goupil’s good
fortune, gave information that Goupil himself was the author of the
libel; that, ten years before, he had been put into the Bicetre for
swindling; and that Madame Goupil had been only three years out of the
Salpetriere, where she had been placed under another name.  This Madame
Goupil was very pretty and very intriguing; she had found means to form
an intimacy with Cardinal de Rohan, whom she led, it is said, to hope for
a reconciliation with the Queen.  All this affair was hushed up; but it
shows that it was the Queen’s fate to be incessantly attacked by the
meanest and most odious machinations.
Another woman, named Cahouette de Millers, whose husband held an office
in the Treasury, being very irregular in conduct, and of a scheming turn
of mind, had a mania for appearing in the eyes of her friends at Paris as
a person in favour at Court, to which she was not entitled by either
birth or office.  During the latter years of the life of Louis XV. she
had made many dupes, and picked up considerable sums by passing herself
off as the King’s mistress.  The fear of irritating Madame du Barry was,
according to her, the only thing which prevented her enjoying that title
openly.  She came regularly to Versailles, kept herself concealed in a
furnished lodging, and her dupes imagined she was secretly summoned to
Court.
This woman formed the scheme of getting admission, if possible, to the
presence of the Queen, or at least causing it to be believed that she had
done so.  She adopted as her lover Gabriel de Saint Charles, intendant of
her Majesty’s finances,–an office, the privileges of which were confined
to the right of entering the Queen’s apartment on Sunday.  Madame de
Villers came every Saturday to Versailles with M. de Saint Charles, and
lodged in his apartment.  M. Campan was there several times.  She painted
tolerably well, and she requested him to do her the favour to present to
the Queen a portrait of her Majesty which she had just copied.  M. Campan
knew the woman’s character, and refused her.  A few days after, he saw on
her Majesty’s couch the portrait which he had declined to present to her;
the Queen thought it badly painted, and gave orders that it should be
carried back to the Princesse de Lamballe, who had sent it to her.  The
ill success of the portrait did not deter the manoeuvrer from following
up her designs; she easily procured through M. de Saint Charles patents
and orders signed by the Queen; she then set about imitating her writing,
and composed a great number of notes and letters, as if written by her
Majesty, in the tenderest and most familiar style.  For many months she
showed them as great secrets to several of her particular friends.
Afterwards, she made the Queen appear to write to her, to procure various
fancy articles.  Under the pretext of wishing to execute her Majesty’s
commissions accurately, she gave these letters to the tradesmen to read,
and succeeded in having it said, in many houses, that the Queen had a
particular regard for her.  She then enlarged her scheme, and represented
the Queen as desiring to borrow 200,000 francs which she had need of, but
which she did not wish to ask of the King from his private funds.  This
letter, being shown to M. Beranger, ’fermier general’ of the finances,
took effect; he thought himself fortunate in being able to render this
assistance to his sovereign, and lost no time in sending the 200,000
francs to Madame de Villers.  This first step was followed by some
doubts, which he communicated to people better informed than himself of
what was passing at Court; they added to his uneasiness; he then went to
M. de Sartine, who unravelled the whole plot.  The woman was sent to St.
Pelagie; and the unfortunate husband was ruined, by replacing the sum
borrowed, and by paying for the jewels fraudulently purchased in the
Queen’s name.  The forged letters were sent to her Majesty; I compared
them in her presence with her own handwriting, and the only
distinguishable difference was a little more regularity in the letters.
This trick, discovered and punished with prudence and without passion,
produced no more sensation out of doors than that of the Inspector
Goupil.
A year after the nomination of Madame de Lamballe to the post of
superintendent of the Queen’s household, balls and quadrilles gave rise
to the intimacy of her Majesty with the Comtesse Jules de Polignac.  This
lady really interested Marie Antoinette.  She was not rich, and generally
lived upon her estate at Claye.  The Queen was astonished at not having
seen her at Court earlier.  The confession that her want of fortune had
even prevented her appearance at the celebration of the marriages of the
Princes added to the interest which she had inspired.
The Queen was full of consideration, and took delight in counteracting
the injustice of fortune.  The Countess was induced to come to Court by
her husband’s sister, Madame Diane de Polignac, who had been appointed
lady of honour to the Comtesse d’Artois.  The Comtesse Jules was really
fond of a tranquil life; the impression she made at Court affected her
but little; she felt only the attachment manifested for her by the Queen.
I had occasion to see her from the commencement of her favour at Court;
she often passed whole hours with me, while waiting for the Queen.  She
conversed with me freely and ingenuously about the honour, and at the
same time the danger, she saw in the kindness of which she was the
object.  The Queen sought for the sweets of friendship; but can this
gratification, so rare in any rank, exist between a Queen and a subject,
when they are surrounded, moreover, by snares laid by the artifice of
courtiers?  This pardonable error was fatal to the happiness of Marie
Antoinette.
The retiring character of the Comtesse Jules, afterwards Duchesse de
Polignac, cannot be spoken of too favourably; but if her heart was
incapable of forming ambitious projects, her family and friends in her
fortune beheld their own, and endeavoured to secure the favour of the
Queen.
     [The Comtesse, afterwards Duchesse de Polignac, nee Polastron,
     Married the Comte (in 1780 the Duc) Jules de Polignac, the father of
     the Prince de Polignac of Napoleon’s and of Charles X.’s time.  She
     emigrated in 1789, and died in Vienna in 1793.]
The Comtesse de Diane, sister of M. de Polignac, and the Baron de
Besenval and M. de Vaudreuil, particular friends of the Polignac family,
made use of means, the success of which was infallible.  One of my
friends (Comte de Moustier), who was in their secret, came to tell me
that Madame de Polignac was about to quit Versailles suddenly; that she
would take leave of the Queen only in writing; that the Comtesse Diane
and M. de Vaudreuil had dictated her letter, and the whole affair was
arranged for the purpose of stimulating the attachment of Marie
Antoinette.  The next day, when I went up to the palace, I found the
Queen with a letter in her hand, which she was reading with much emotion;
it was the letter from the Comtesse Jules; the Queen showed it to me.
The Countess expressed in it her grief at leaving a princess who had
loaded her with kindness.  The narrowness of her fortune compelled her to
do so; but she was much more strongly impelled by the fear that the
Queen’s friendship, after having raised up dangerous enemies against her,
might abandon her to their hatred, and to the regret of having lost the
august favour of which she was the object.
This step produced the full effect that had been expected from it.  A
young and sensitive queen cannot long bear the idea of contradiction.
She busied herself in settling the Comtesse Jules near her, by making
such a provision for her as should place her beyond anxiety.  Her
character suited the Queen; she had merely natural talents, no pedantry,
no affectation of knowledge.  She was of middle size; her complexion very
fair, her eyebrows and hair dark brown, her teeth superb, her smile
enchanting, and her whole person graceful.  She was seen almost always in
a demi-toilet, remarkable only for neatness and good taste.  I do not
think I ever once saw diamonds about her, even at the climax of her
fortune, when she had the rank of Duchess at Court.
I have always believed that her sincere attachment for the Queen, as much
as her love of simplicity, induced her to avoid everything that might
cause her to be thought a wealthy favourite.  She had not one of the
failings which usually accompany that position.  She loved the persons
who shared the Queen’s affections, and was entirely free from jealousy.
Marie Antoinette flattered herself that the Comtesse Jules and the
Princesse de Lamballe would be her especial friends, and that she should
possess a society formed according to her own taste.  “I will receive
them in my closet, or at Trianon,” said she; “I will enjoy the comforts
of private life, which exist not for us, unless we have the good sense to
secure them for ourselves.”  The happiness the Queen thought to secure
was destined to turn to vexation.  All those courtiers who were not
admitted to this intimacy became so many jealous and vindictive enemies.
It was necessary to make a suitable provision for the Countess.  The
place of first equerry, in reversion after the Comte de Tesse, given to
Comte Jules unknown to the titular holder, displeased the family of
Noailles.  This family had just sustained another mortification, the
appointment of the Princesse de Lamballe having in some degree rendered
necessary the resignation of the Comtesse de Noailles, whose husband was
thereupon made a marshal of France.  The Princesse de Lamballe, although
she did not quarrel with the Queen, was alarmed at the establishment of
the Comtesse Jules at Court, and did not form, as her Majesty had hoped,
a part of that intimate society, which was in turn composed of Mesdames
Jules and Diane de Polignac, d’Andlau and de Chalon, and Messieurs de
Guignes, de Coigny, d’Adhemar, de Besenval, lieutenant-colonel of the
Swiss, de Polignac, de Vaudreuil, and de Guiche; the Prince de Ligne and
the Duke of Dorset, the English ambassador, were also admitted.
It was a long time before the Comtesse Jules maintained any great state
at Court.  The Queen contented herself with giving her very fine
apartments at the top of the marble staircase.  The salary of first
equerry, the trifling emoluments derived from M. de Polignac’s regiment,
added to their slender patrimony, and perhaps some small pension, at that
time formed the whole fortune of the favourite.  I never saw the Queen
make her a present of value; I was even astonished one day at hearing her
Majesty mention, with pleasure, that the Countess had gained ten thousand
francs in the lottery.  “She was in great want of it,” added the Queen.
Thus the Polignacs were not settled at Court in any degree of splendour
which could justify complaints from others, and the substantial favours
bestowed upon that family were less envied than the intimacy between them
and their proteges and the Queen.  Those who had no hope of entering the
circle of the Comtesse Jules were made jealous by the opportunities of
advancement it afforded.
However, at the time I speak of, the society around the Comtesse Jules
was fully engaged in gratifying the young Queen.  Of this the Marquis de
Vaudreuil was a conspicuous member; he was a brilliant man, the friend
and protector of men of letters and celebrated artists.
The Baron de Besenval added to the bluntness of the Swiss all the
adroitness of a French courtier.  His fifty years and gray hairs made him
enjoy among women the confidence inspired by mature age, although he had
not given up the thought of love affairs.  He talked of his native
mountains with enthusiasm.  He would at any time sing the “Ranz des
Vaches” with tears in his eyes, and was the best story-teller in the
Comtesse Jules’s circle.  The last new song or ’bon mot’ and the gossip
of the day were the sole topics of conversation in the Queen’s parties.
Wit was banished from them.  The Comtesse Diane, more inclined to
literary pursuits than her sister-in-law, one day, recommended her to
read the “Iliad” and “Odyssey.”  The latter replied, laughing, that she
was perfectly acquainted with the Greek poet, and said to prove it:
          “Homere etait aveugle et jouait du hautbois.”
          (Homer was blind and played on the hautboy.)
     [This lively repartee of the Duchesse de Polignac is a droll
     imitation of a line in the “Mercure Galant.”  In the quarrel scene
     one of the lawyers says to his brother quill: ’Ton pere etait
     aveugle et jouait du hautbois.’]
The Queen found this sort of humour very much to her taste, and said that
no pedant should ever be her friend.
Before the Queen fixed her assemblies at Madame de Polignac’s, she
occasionally passed the evening at the house of the Duc and Duchesse de
Duras, where a brilliant party of young persons met together.  They
introduced a taste for trifling games, such as question and answer,
’guerre panpan’, blind man’s buff, and especially a game called
’descampativos’.  The people of Paris, always criticising, but always
imitating the customs of the Court, were infected with the mania for
these childish sports.  Madame de Genlis, sketching the follies of the
day in one of her plays, speaks of these famous ’descampativos’; and also
of the rage for making a friend, called the ’inseparable’, until a whim
or the slightest difference might occasion a total rupture.
The Duc de Choiseul had reappeared at Court on the ceremony of the King’s
coronation for the first time after his disgrace under Louis XV. in 1770.
The state of public feeling on the subject gave his friends hope of
seeing him again in administration, or in the Council of State; but the
opposite party was too firmly seated at Versailles, and the young Queen’s
influence was outweighed, in the mind of the King, by long-standing
prejudices; she therefore gave up for ever her attempt to reinstate the
Duke.  Thus this Princess, who has been described as so ambitious, and so
strenuously supporting the interest of the House of Austria, failed twice
in the only scheme which could forward the views constantly attributed to
her; and spent the whole of her reign surrounded by enemies of herself
and her house.
Marie Antoinette took little pains to promote literature and the fine
arts.  She had been annoyed in consequence of having ordered a
performance of the “Connstable de Bourbon,” on the celebration of the
marriage of Madame Clotilde with the Prince of Piedmont.  The Court and
the people of Paris censured as indecorous the naming characters in the
piece after the reigning family, and that with which the new alliance was
formed.  The reading of this piece by the Comte de Guibert in the Queen’s
closet had produced in her Majesty’s circle that sort of enthusiasm which
obscures the judgment.  She promised herself she would have no more
readings.  Yet, at the request of M. de Cubieres, the King’s equerry,
the Queen agreed to hear the reading of a comedy written by his brother.
She collected her intimate circle, Messieurs de Coigny, de Vaudreuil, de
Besenval, Mesdames de Polignac, de Chalon, etc., and to increase the
number of judges, she admitted the two Parnys, the Chevalier de Bertin,
my father-in-law, and myself.
Mold read for the author.  I never could satisfy myself by what magic the
skilful reader gained our unanimous approbation of a ridiculous work.
Surely the delightful voice of Mold, by awakening our recollection of the
dramatic beauties of the French stage, prevented the wretched lines of
Dorat Cubieres from striking on our ears.  I can assert that the
exclamation Charming! charming! repeatedly interrupted the reader.  The
piece was admitted for performance at Fontainebleau; and for the first
time the King had the curtain dropped before the end of the play.  It was
called the “Dramomane” or “Dramaturge.”  All the characters died of
eating poison in a pie.  The Queen, highly disconcerted at having
recommended this absurd production, announced that she would never hear
another reading; and this time she kept her word.
The tragedy of “Mustapha and Mangir,” by M. de Chamfort, was highly
successful at the Court theatre at Fontainebleau.  The Queen procured the
author a pension of 1,200 francs, but his play failed on being performed
at Paris.
The spirit of opposition which prevailed in that city delighted in
reversing the verdicts of the Court.  The Queen determined never again to
give any marked countenance to new dramatic works.  She reserved her
patronage for musical composers, and in a few years their art arrived at
a perfection it had never before attained in France.
It was solely to gratify the Queen that the manager of the Opera brought
the first company of comic actors to Paris.  Gluck, Piccini, and Sacchini
were attracted there in succession.  These eminent composers were treated
with great distinction at Court.  Immediately on his arrival in France,
Gluck was admitted to the Queen’s toilet, and she talked to him all the
time he remained with her.  She asked him one day whether he had nearly
brought his grand opera of “Armide” to a conclusion, and whether it
pleased him.  Gluck replied very coolly, in his German accent, “Madame,
it will soon be finished, and really it will be superb.”  There was a
great outcry against the confidence with which the composer had spoken of
one of his own productions.  The Queen defended him warmly; she insisted
that he could not be ignorant of the merit of his works; that he well
knew they were generally admired, and that no doubt he was afraid lest a
modesty, merely dictated by politeness, should look like affectation in
him.
     [Gluck often had to deal with self-sufficiency equal to his own.
     He was very reluctant to introduce long ballets into “Iphigenia."
     Vestris deeply regretted that the opera was not terminated by a
     piece they called a chaconne, in which he displayed all his power.
     He complained to Gluck about it.  Gluck, who treated his art with
     all the dignity it merits, replied that in so interesting a subject
     dancing would be misplaced.  Being pressed another time by Vestris
     on the same subject, “A chaconne!  A chaconne!”  roared out the
     enraged musician; “we must describe the Greeks; and had the Greeks
     chaconnes?”  “They had not?”  returned the astonished dancer; “why,
     then, so much the worse for them!"–NOTE BY THE EDITOR.]
The Queen did not confine her admiration to the lofty style of the French
and Italian operas; she greatly valued Gretry’s music, so well adapted to
the spirit and feeling of the words.  A great deal of the poetry set to
music by Gretry is by Marmontel.  The day after the first performance of
"Zemira and Azor,” Marmontel and Gretry were presented to the Queen as
she was passing through the gallery of Fontainebleau to go to mass.  The
Queen congratulated Gretry on the success of the new opera, and told him
that she had dreamed of the enchanting effect of the trio by Zemira’s
father and sisters behind the magic mirror.  Gretry, in a transport of
joy, took Marmontel in his arms, “Ah! my friend,” cried he, “excellent
music may be made of this."–"And execrable words,” coolly observed
Marmontel, to whom her Majesty had not addressed a single compliment.
The most indifferent artists were permitted to have the honour of
painting the Queen.  A full-length portrait, representing her in all the
pomp of royalty, was exhibited in the gallery of Versailles.  This
picture, which was intended for the Court of Vienna, was executed by a
man who does not deserve even to be named, and disgusted all people of
taste.  It seemed as if this art had, in France, retrograded several
centuries.
The Queen had not that enlightened judgment, or even that mere taste,
which enables princes to foster and protect great talents.  She confessed
frankly that she saw no merit in any portrait beyond the likeness.  When
she went to the Louvre, she would run hastily over all the little “genre"
pictures, and come out, as she acknowledged, without having once raised
her eyes to the grand compositions.
There is no good portrait of the Queen, save that by Werthmuller, chief
painter to the King of Sweden, which was sent to Stockholm, and that by
Madame Lebrun, which was saved from the revolutionary fury by the
commissioners for the care of the furniture at Versailles.
     [A sketch of very great interest made when the Queen was in the
     Temple and discovered many years afterwards there, recently
     reproduced in the memoirs of the Marquise de Tourzel (Paris, Plon),
     is the last authentic portrait of the unhappy Queen.  See also the
     catalogue of portraits made by Lord Ronald Gower.]
The composition of the latter picture resembles that of Henriette of
France, the wife of the unfortunate Charles I., painted by Vandyke.  Like
Marie Antoinette, she is seated, surrounded by her children, and that
resemblance adds to the melancholy interest raised by this beautiful
production.
While admitting that the Queen gave no direct encouragement to any art
but that of music, I should be wrong to pass over in silence the
patronage conferred by her and the Princes, brothers of the King, on the
art of printing.
     [In 1790 the King gave a proof of his particular good-will to the
     bookselling trade.  A company consisting of the first Parisian
     booksellers, being on the eve of stopping payment, succeeded in
     laying before the King a statement of their distressed situation.
     The monarch was affected by it; he took from the civil list the sum
     of which the society stood in immediate need, and became security
     for the repayment of the remainder of the 1,200,000 livres, which
     they wanted to borrow, and for the repayment of which he fixed no
     particular time.]
To Marie Antoinette we are indebted for a splendid quarto edition of the
works of Metastasio; to Monsieur, the King’s brother, for a quarto Tasso,
embellished with engravings after Cochin; and to the Comte d’Artois for a
small collection of select works, which is considered one of the chef
d’oeuvres of the press of the celebrated Didot.
In 1775, on the death of the Marechal du Muy, the ascendency obtained by
the sect of innovators occasioned M. de Saint-Germain to be recalled to
Court and made Minister of War.  His first care was the destruction of
the King’s military household establishment, an imposing and effectual
rampart round the sovereign power.
When Chancellor Maupeou obtained from Louis XV. the destruction of the
Parliament and the exile of all the ancient magistrates, the
Mousquetaires were charged with the execution of the commission for this
purpose; and at the stroke of midnight, the presidents and members were
all arrested, each by two Mousquetaires.  In the spring of 1775 a popular
insurrection had taken place in consequence of the high price of bread.
M. Turgot’s new regulation, which permitted unlimited trade in corn, was
either its cause or the pretext for it; and the King’s household troops
again rendered the greatest services to public tranquillity.
I have never be enable to discover the true cause of the support given to
M. de Saint-Germain’s policy by the Queen, unless in the marked favour
shown to the captains and officers of the Body Guards, who by this
reduction became the only soldiers of their rank entrusted with the
safety of the sovereign; or else in the Queen’s strong prejudice against
the Duc d’Aiguillon, then commander of the light-horse.  M. de Saint-
Germain, however, retained fifty gens d’armes and fifty light-horse to
form a royal escort on state occasions; but in 1787 the King reduced both
these military bodies.  The Queen then said with satisfaction that at
last she should see no more red coats in the gallery of Versailles.
From 1775 to 1781 were the gayest years of the Queen’s life.  In the
little journeys to Choisy, performances frequently took place at the
theatre twice in one day: grand opera and French or Italian comedy at the
usual hour; and at eleven at night they returned to the theatre for
parodies in which the best actors of the Opera presented themselves in
whimsical parts and costumes.  The celebrated dancer Guimard always took
the leading characters in the latter performance; she danced better than
she acted; her extreme leanness, and her weak, hoarse voice added to the
burlesque in the parodied characters of Ernelinde and Iphigenie.
The most magnificent fete ever given to the Queen was one prepared for
her by Monsieur, the King’s brother, at Brunoy.  That Prince did me the
honour to admit me, and I followed her Majesty into the gardens, where
she found in the first copse knights in full armour asleep at the foot of
trees, on which hung their spears and shields.  The absence of the
beauties who had incited the nephews of Charlemagne and the gallants of
that period to lofty deeds was supposed to occasion this lethargic
slumber.  But when the Queen appeared at the entrance of the copse they
were on foot in an instant, and melodious voices announced their
eagerness to display their valour.  They then hastened into a vast arena,
magnificently decorated in the exact style of the ancient tournaments.
Fifty dancers dressed as pages presented to the knights twenty-five
superb black horses, and twenty-five of a dazzling whiteness, all most
richly caparisoned.  The party led by Augustus Vestris wore the Queen’s
colours.  Picq, balletmaster at the Russian Court, commanded the opposing
band.  There was running at the negro’s head, tilting, and, lastly,
combats ’a outrance’, perfectly well imitated.  Although the spectators
were aware that the Queen’s colours could not but be victorious, they did
not the less enjoy the apparent uncertainty.
Nearly all the agreeable women of Paris were ranged upon the steps which
surrounded the area of the tourney.  The Queen, surrounded by the royal
family and the whole Court, was placed beneath an elevated canopy.  A
play, followed by a ballet-pantomime and a ball, terminated the fete.
Fireworks and illuminations were not spared.  Finally, from a
prodigiously high scaffold, placed on a rising ground, the words ’Vive
Louis!  Vive Marie Antoinette!’  were shown in the air in the midst of a
very dark but calm night.
Pleasure was the sole pursuit of every one of this young family, with the
exception of the King.  Their love of it was perpetually encouraged by a
crowd of those officious people who, by anticipating the desires and even
the passions of princes, find means of showing their zeal, and hope to
gain or maintain favour for themselves.
Who would have dared to check the amusements of a queen, young, lively,
and handsome?  A mother or a husband alone would have had the right to do
it; and the King threw no impediment in the way of Marie Antoinette’s
inclinations.  His long indifference had been followed by admiration and
love.  He was a slave to all the wishes of the Queen, who, delighted with
the happy change in the heart and habits of the King, did not
sufficiently conceal the ascendency she was gaining over him.
The King went to bed every night at eleven precisely; he was very
methodical, and nothing was allowed to interfere with his rules.  The
noise which the Queen unavoidably made when she returned very late from
the evenings which she spent with the Princesse de Gugmenee or the Duc de
Duras, at last annoyed the King, and it was amicably agreed that the
Queen should apprise him when she intended to sit up late.  He then began
to sleep in his own apartment, which had never before happened from the
time of their marriage.
During the winter the Queen attended the Opera balls with a single lady
of the palace, and always found there Monsieur and the Comte d’Artois.
Her people concealed their liveries under gray cloth greatcoats.  She
never thought she was recognized, while all the time she was known to the
whole assembly, from the first moment she entered the theatre; they
pretended, however, not to recognise her, and some masquerade manoeuvre
was always adopted to give her the pleasure of fancying herself
incognito.
Louis XVI. determined once to accompany the Queen to a masked ball;
it was agreed that the King should hold not only the grand but the petit
coucher, as if actually going to bed.  The Queen went to his apartment
through the inner corridors of the palace, followed by one of her women
with a black domino; she assisted him to put it on, and they went alone
to the chapel court, where a carriage waited for them, with the captain
of the Guard of the quarter, and a lady of the palace.  The King was but
little amused, spoke only to two or three persons, who knew him
immediately, and found nothing to admire at the masquerade but Punches
and Harlequins, which served as a joke against him for the royal family,
who often amused themselves with laughing at him about it.
An event, simple in itself, brought dire suspicion upon the Queen.  She
was going out one evening with the Duchesse de Lupnes, lady of the
palace, when her carriage broke down at the entrance into Paris; she was
obliged to alight; the Duchess led her into a shop, while a footman
called a ’fiacre’.  As they were masked, if they had but known how to
keep silence, the event would never have been known; but to ride in a
fiacre is so unusual an adventure for a queen that she had hardly entered
the Opera-house when she could not help saying to some persons whom she
met there: “That I should be in a fiacre!  Is it not droll?”
From that moment all Paris was informed of the adventure of the fiacre.
It was said that everything connected with it was mysterious; that the
Queen had kept an assignation in a private house with the Duc de Coigny.
He was indeed very well received at Court, but equally so by the King and
Queen.  These accusations of gallantry once set afloat, there were no
longer any bounds to the calumnies circulated at Paris.  If, during the
chase or at cards, the Queen spoke to Lord Edward Dillon, De Lambertye,
or others, they were so many favoured lovers.  The people of Paris did
not know that none of those young persons were admitted into the Queen’s
private circle of friends; the Queen went about Paris in disguise, and
had made use of a fiacre; and a single instance of levity gives room for
the suspicion of others.
Conscious of innocence, and well knowing that all about her must do
justice to her private life, the Queen spoke of these reports with
contempt, contenting herself with the supposition that some folly in the
young men mentioned had given rise to them.  She therefore left off
speaking to them or even looking at them.  Their vanity took alarm at
this, and revenge induced them either to say, or to leave others to
think, that they were unfortunate enough to please no longer.  Other
young coxcombs, placing themselves near the private box which the Queen
occupied incognito when she attended the public theatre at Versailles,
had the presumption to imagine that they were noticed by her; and I have
known such notions entertained merely on account of the Queen’s
requesting one of those gentlemen to inquire behind the scenes whether it
would be long before the commencement of the second piece.
The list of persons received into the Queen’s closet which I gave in the
preceding chapter was placed in the hands of the ushers of the chamber by
the Princesse de Lamballe; and the persons there enumerated could present
themselves to enjoy the distinction only on those days when the Queen
chose to be with her intimates in a private manner; and this was only
when she was slightly indisposed.  People of the first rank at Court
sometimes requested special audiences of her; the Queen then received
them in a room within that called the closet of the women on duty, and
these women announced them in her Majesty’s apartment.
The Duc de Lauzun had a good deal of wit, and chivalrous manners.  The
Queen was accustomed to see him at the King’s suppers, and at the house
of the Princesse de Guemenee, and always showed him attention.  One day
he made his appearance at Madame de Guemenee’s in uniform, and with the
most magnificent plume of white heron’s feathers that it was possible to
behold.  The Queen admired the plume, and he offered it to her through
the Princesse de Guemenee.  As he had worn it the Queen had not imagined
that he could think of giving it to her; much embarrassed with the
present which she had, as it were, drawn upon herself, she did not like
to refuse it, nor did she know whether she ought to make one in return;
afraid, if she did give anything, of giving either too much or too
little, she contented herself with once letting M. de Lauzun see her
adorned with the plume.  In his secret “Memoirs” the Duke attaches an
importance to his present, which proves him utterly unworthy of an honour
accorded only to his name and rank
A short time afterwards he solicited an audience; the Queen granted it,
as she would have done to any other courtier of equal rank.  I was in the
room adjoining that in which he was received; a few minutes after his
arrival the Queen reopened the door, and said aloud, and in an angry tone
of voice, “Go, monsieur.”  M. de Lauzun bowed low, and withdrew.  The
Queen was much agitated.  She said to me: “That man shall never again
come within my doors.”  A few years before the Revolution of 1789 the
Marechal de Biron died.  The Duc de Lauzun, heir to his name, aspired to
the important post of colonel of the regiment of French guards.  The
Queen, however, procured it for the Duc du Chaatelet.  The Duc de Biron
espoused the cause of the Duc d’Orleans, and became one of the most
violent enemies of Marie Antoinette.
It is with reluctance that I enter minutely on a defence of the Queen
against two infamous accusations with which libellers have dared to swell
their envenomed volumes.  I mean the unworthy suspicions of too strong an
attachment for the Comte d’Artois, and of the motives for the tender
friendship which subsisted between the Queen, the Princesse de Lamballe,
and the Duchesse de Polignac.  I do not believe that the Comte d’Artois
was, during his own youth and that of the Queen, so much smitten as has
been said with the loveliness of his sister-in-law; I can affirm that I
always saw that Prince maintain the most respectful demeanour towards the
Queen; that she always spoke of his good-nature and cheerfulness with
that freedom which attends only the purest sentiments; and that none of
those about the Queen ever saw in the affection she manifested towards
the Comte d’Artois more than that of a kind and tender sister for her
youngest brother.  As to the intimate connection between Marie Antoinette
and the ladies I have named, it never had, nor could have, any other
motive than the very innocent wish to secure herself two friends in the
midst of a numerous Court; and notwithstanding this intimacy, that tone
of respect observed by persons of the most exalted rank towards majesty
never ceased to be maintained.
The Queen, much occupied with the society of Madame de Polignac, and an
unbroken series of amusements, found less time for the Abbe de Vermond;
he therefore resolved to retire from Court.  The world did him the honour
to believe that he had hazarded remonstrances upon his august pupil’s
frivolous employment of her time, and that he considered himself, both as
an ecclesiastic and as instructor, now out of place at Court.  But the
world was deceived his dissatisfaction arose purely from the favour shown
to the Comtesse Jules.  After a fortnight’s absence we saw him at
Versailles again, resuming his usual functions.
The Queen could express herself with winning graciousness to persons who
merited her praise.  When M. Loustonneau was appointed to the reversion
of the post of first surgeon to the King, he came to make his
acknowledgments.  He was much beloved by the poor, to whom he had chiefly
devoted his talents, spending nearly thirty thousand francs a year on
indigent sufferers.  The Queen replied to his thanks by saying: “You are
satisfied, Monsieur; but I am far from being so with the inhabitants of
Versailles.  On the news of your appointment the town should have been
illuminated."–"How so, Madame?” asked the astonished surgeon, who was
very modest.  “Why,” replied the Queen, “if the poor whom you have
succoured for the past twenty years had each placed a single candle in
their windows it would have been the most beautiful illumination ever
witnessed.”
The Queen did not limit her kindness to friendly words.  There was
frequently seen in the apartments of Versailles a veteran captain of the
grenadiers of France, called the Chevalier d’Orville, who for four years
had been soliciting from the Minister of War the post of major, or of
King’s lieutenant.  He was known to be very poor; but he supported his
lot without complaining of this vexatious delay in rewarding his
honourable services.  He regularly attended the Marechal de Segur,
at the hour appointed for receiving the numerous solicitations in his
department.  One day the Marshal said to him: “You are still at
Versailles, M. d’Orville?"–"Monsieur,” he replied, “you may observe that
by this board of the flooring where I regularly place myself; it is
already worn down several lines by the weight of my body.”  The Queen
frequently stood at the window of her bedchamber to observe with her
glass the people walking in the park.  Sometimes she inquired the names
of those who were unknown to her.  One day she saw the Chevalier
d’Orville passing, and asked me the name of that knight of Saint Louis,
whom she had seen everywhere for a long time past.  I knew who he was,
and related his history.  “That must be put an end to,” said the Queen,
with some vivacity.  “Such an example of indifference is calculated to
discourage our soldiers.”  Next day, in crossing the gallery to go to
mass, the Queen perceived the Chevalier d’Orville; she went directly
towards him.  The poor man fell back in the recess of a window, looking
to the right and left to discover the person whom the Queen was seeking,
when she thus addressed him: “M. d’Orville, you have been several years
at Versailles, soliciting a majority or a King’s lieutenancy.  You must
have very powerless patrons."–"I have none, Madame,” replied the
Chevalier, in great confusion.  “Well! I will take you under my
protection.  To-morrow at the same hour be here with a petition, and a
memorial of your services.”  A fortnight after, M. d’Orville was
appointed King’s lieutenant, either at La Rochelle or at Rochefort.
     [Louis XVI. vied with his Queen in benevolent actions of this kind.
     An old officer had in vain solicited a pension during the
     administration of the Duc de Choiseul.  He returned to the charge in
     the times of the Marquis de Montesnard and the Duc d’Aiguillon.  He
     urged his claims, to Comte du Muy, who made a note of them.  Tired
     of so many fruitless efforts, he at last appeared at the King’s
     supper, and, having placed himself so as to be seen and heard, cried
     out at a moment when silence prevailed, “Sire.”  The people near him
     said, “What are you about?  This is not the way to speak to the
     King."–"I fear nothing,” said he, and raising his voice, repeated,
     “Sire.”  The King, much surprised, looked at him and said, “What do
     you want, monsieur."–"Sire,” answered he, “I am seventy years of
     age; I have served your Majesty more than fifty years, and I am
     dying for want."–"Have you a memorial?”  replied the King.  “Yes,
     Sire, I have."–"Give it to me;” and his Majesty took it without
     saying anything more.  Next morning he was sent for by the, King,
     who said, “Monsieur, I grant you an annuity of 1,500 livres out of
     my privy purse, and you may go and receive the first year’s payment,
     which is now due.”  ("Secret Correspondence of the Court: Reign of
     Louis XVI.”) The King preferred to spend money in charity rather
     than in luxury or magnificence.  Once during his absence, M.
     d’Augivillers caused an unused room in the King’s apartment to be
     repaired at a cost of 30,000 francs.  On his return the King made
     Versailles resound with complaints against M. d’Augivillers: “With
     that sum I could have made thirty families happy,” he said.]
From the time of Louis XVI.’s accession to the throne, the Queen had been
expecting a visit from her brother, the Emperor Joseph II.  That Prince
was the constant theme of her discourse.  She boasted of his
intelligence, his love of occupation, his military knowledge, and the
perfect simplicity of his manners.  Those about her Majesty ardently
wished to see at Versailles a prince so worthy of his rank.  At length
the coming of Joseph II., under the title of Count Falkenstein, was
announced, and the very day on which he would be at Versailles was
mentioned.  The first embraces between the Queen and her august brother
took place in the presence of all the Queen’s household.  The sight of
their emotion was extremely affecting.
The Emperor was at first generally admired in France; learned men, well-
informed officers, and celebrated artists appreciated the extent of his
information.  He made less impression at Court, and very little in the
private circle of the King and Queen.  His eccentric manners, his
frankness, often degenerating into rudeness, and his evidently affected
simplicity,–all these characteristics caused him to be looked upon as a
prince rather singular than admirable.  The Queen spoke to him about the
apartment she had prepared for him in the Chateau; the Emperor answered
that he would not accept it, and that while travelling he always lodged
at a cabaret (that was his very expression); the Queen insisted, and
assured him that he should be at perfect liberty, and placed out of the
reach of noise.  He replied that he knew the Chateau of Versailles was
very large, and that so many scoundrels lived there that he could well
find a place; but that his valet de chambre had made up his camp-bed in a
lodging-house, and there he would stay.
He dined with the King and Queen, and supped with the whole family.  He
appeared to take an interest in the young Princesse Elisabeth, then just
past childhood, and blooming in all the freshness of that age.  An
intended marriage between him and this young sister of the King was
reported at the time, but I believe it had no foundation in truth.
The table was still served by women only, when the Queen dined in private
with the King, the royal family, or crowned heads.
     [The custom was, even supposing dinner to have commenced, if a
     princess of the blood arrived, and she was asked to sit down at the
     Queen’s table, the comptrollers and gentlemen-in-waiting came
     immediately to attend, and the Queen’s women withdrew.  These had
     succeeded the maids of honour in several parts of their service, and
     had preserved some of their privileges.  One day the Duchesse
     d’Orleans arrived at Fontainebleau, at the Queen’s dinner-hour.  The
     Queen invited her to the table, and herself motioned to her women to
     leave the room, and let the men take their places.  Her Majesty said
     she was resolved to continue a privilege which kept places of that
     description most honourable, and render them suitable for ladies of
     nobility without fortune.  Madame de Misery, Baronne de Biache, the
     Queen’s first lady of the chamber, to whom I was made reversioner,
     was a daughter of M. le Comte de Chemant, and her grandmother was a
     Montmorency.  M. le Prince de Tingry, in the presence of the Queen,
     used to call her cousin.  The ancient household of the Kings of
     France had prerogatives acknowledged in the state.  Many of the
     offices were tenable only by those of noble blood, and were sold at
     from 40,000 to 300,000 franca.  A collection of edicts of the Kings
     in favour of the prerogatives and right of precedence of the persons
     holding office in the royal household is still in existence.]
I was present at the Queen’s dinner almost every day.  The Emperor would
talk much and fluently; he expressed himself in French with facility, and
the singularity, of his expressions added a zest to his conversation.  I
have often heard him say that he liked spectacculous objects, when he
meant to express such things as formed a show, or a scene worthy of
interest.  He disguised none of his prejudices against the etiquette and
customs of the Court of France; and even in the presence of the King made
them the subject of his sarcasms.  The King smiled, but never made any
answer; the Queen appeared pained.  The Emperor frequently terminated his
observations upon the objects in Paris which he had admired by
reproaching the King for suffering himself to remain in ignorance of
them.  He could not conceive how such a wealth of pictures should remain
shut up in the dust of immense stores; and told him one day that but for
the practice of placing some of them in the apartments of Versailles he
would not know even the principal chef d’oeuvres that he possessed.
     [The Emperor loudly censured the existing practice of allowing
     shopkeepers to erect shops near the outward walls of all the
     palaces, and even to establish something like a fair in the
     galleries of Versailles and Fontainebleau, and even upon the
     landings of the staircases.]
He also reproached him for not having visited the Hotel des Invalides nor
the Ecole Militaire; and even went so far as to tell him before us that
he ought not only to know what Paris contained, but to travel in France,
and reside a few days in each of his large towns.
At last the Queen was really hurt at the Emperor’s remarks, and gave him
a few lectures upon the freedom with which he allowed himself to lecture
others.  One day she was busied in signing warrants and orders for
payment for her household, and was conversing with M. Augeard, her
secretary for such matters, who presented the papers one after another to
be signed, and replaced them in his portfolio.  While this was going
forward, the Emperor walked about the room; all at once he stood still,
to reproach the Queen rather severely for signing all those papers
without reading them, or, at least, without running her eye over them;
and he spoke most judiciously to her upon the danger of signing her name
inconsiderately.  The Queen answered that very wise principles might be
very ill applied; that her secretary, who deserved her implicit
confidence, was at that moment laying before her nothing but orders for
payment of the quarter’s expenses of her household, registered in the
Chamber of Accounts; and that she ran no risk of incautiously giving her
signature.
The Queen’s toilet was likewise a never-failing subject for animadversion
with the Emperor.  He blamed her for having introduced too many new
fashions; and teased her about her use of rouge.  One day, while she was
laying on more of it than usual, before going to the play, he pointed out
a lady who was in the room, and who was, in truth, highly painted.  “A
little more under the eyes,” said the Emperor to the Queen; “lay on the
rouge like a fury, as that lady does.”  The Queen entreated her brother
to refrain from his jokes, or at all events to address them, when they
were so outspoken, to her alone.
The Queen had made an appointment to meet her brother at the Italian
theatre; she changed her mind, and went to the French theatre, sending a
page to the Italian theatre to request the Emperor to come to her there.
He left his box, lighted by the comedian Clairval, and attended by M. de
la Ferte, comptroller of the Queen’s privy purse, who was much hurt at
hearing his Imperial Majesty, after kindly expressing his regret at not
being present during the Italian performance, say to Clairval, “Your
young Queen is very giddy; but, luckily, you Frenchmen have no great
objection to that.”
I was with my father-in-law in one of the Queen’s apartments when the
Emperor came to wait for her there, and, knowing that M. Campan was
librarian, he conversed with him about such books as would of course be
found in the Queen’s library.  After talking of our most celebrated
authors, he casually said, “There are doubtless no works on finance or
on administration here?”
These words were followed by his opinion on all that had been written on
those topics, and the different systems of our two famous ministers,
Sully and Colbert; on errors which were daily committed in France, in
points essential to the prosperity of the Empire; and on the reform he
himself would make at Vienna.  Holding M. Campan by the button, he spent
more than an hour, talking vehemently, and without the slightest reserve,
about the French Government.  My father-in-law and myself maintained
profound silence, as much from astonishment as from respect; and when we
were alone we agreed not to speak of this interview.
The Emperor was fond of describing the Italian Courts that he had
visited.  The jealous quarrels between the King and Queen of Naples
amused him highly; he described to the life the manner and speech of that
sovereign, and the simplicity with which he used to go and solicit the
first chamberlain to obtain permission to return to the nuptial bed, when
the angry Queen had banished him from it.  The time which he was made to
wait for this reconciliation was calculated between the Queen and her
chamberlain, and always proportioned to the gravity of the offence.  He
also related several very amusing stories relative to the Court of Parma,
of which he spoke with no little contempt.  If what this Prince said of
those Courts, and even of Vienna, had been written down, the whole would
have formed an interesting collection.  The Emperor told the King that
the Grand Duke of Tuscany and the King of Naples being together, the
former said a great deal about the changes he had effected in his State.
The Grand Duke had issued a mass of new edicts, in order to carry the
precepts of the economists into execution, and trusted that in so doing
he was labouring for the welfare of his people.  The King of Naples
suffered him to go on speaking for a long time, and then casually asked
how many Neapolitan families there were in Tuscany.  The Duke soon
reckoned them up, as they were but few.  “Well, brother,” replied the
King of Naples, “I do not understand the indifference of your people
towards your great reforms; for I have four times the number of Tuscan
families settled in my States that you have of Neapolitan families in
yours.”
The Queen being at the Opera with the Emperor, the latter did not wish to
show himself; but she took him by the hand, and gently drew him to the
front of the box.  This kind of presentation to the public was most
warmly received.  The performance was “Iphigenia in Aulis,” and for the
second time.  the chorus, “Chantons, celebrons notre Reine!” was called
for with universal plaudits.
A fete of a novel description was given at Petit Trianon.  The art with
which the English garden was not illuminated, but lighted, produced a
charming effect.  Earthen lamps, concealed by boards painted green, threw
light upon the beds of shrubs and flowers, and brought out their varied
tints.  Several hundred burning fagots in the moat behind the Temple of
Love made a blaze of light, which rendered that spot the most brilliant
in the garden.  After all, this evening’s entertainment had nothing
remarkable about it but the good taste of the artists, yet it was much
talked of.  The situation did not allow the admission of a great part of
the Court; those who were uninvited were dissatisfied; and the people,
who never forgive any fetes but those they share in, so exaggerated the
cost of this little fete as to make it appear that the fagots burnt in
the moat had required the destruction of a whole forest.  The Queen being
informed of these reports, was determined to know exactly how much wood
had been consumed; and she found that fifteen hundred fagots had sufficed
to keep up the fire until four o’clock in the morning.
After staying a few months the Emperor left France, promising his sister
to come and see her again.  All the officers of the Queen’s chamber had
many opportunities of serving him during his stay, and expected that he
would make them presents before his departure.  Their oath of office
positively forbade them to receive a gift from any foreign prince; they
had therefore agreed to refuse the Emperor’s presents at first, but to
ask the time necessary for obtaining permission to accept them.  The
Emperor, probably informed of this custom, relieved the good people from
their difficulty by setting off without making a single present.
About the latter end of 1777 the Queen, being alone in her closet, sent
for my father-in-law and myself, and, giving us her hand to kiss; told us
that, looking upon us both as persons deeply interested in her happiness,
she wished to receive our congratulations,–that at length she was the
Queen of France, and that she hoped soon to have children; that till now
she had concealed her grief, but that she had shed many tears in secret.
Dating from this happy but long-delayed moment, the King’s attachment to
the Queen assumed every characteristic of love.  The good Lassone, first
physician to the King and Queen, frequently spoke to me of the uneasiness
that the King’s indifference, the cause of which he had been so long in
overcoming, had given him, and appeared to me at that time to entertain
no anxiety except of a very different description.
In the winter of 1778 the King’s permission for the return of Voltaire;
after an absence of twenty-seven years, was obtained.  A few strict
persons considered this concession on the part of the Court very
injudicious.  The Emperor, on leaving France, passed by the Chateau of
Ferney without stopping there.  He had advised the Queen not to suffer
Voltaire to be presented to her.  A lady belonging to the Court learned
the Emperor’s opinion on that point, and reproached him with his want of
enthusiasm towards the greatest genius of the age.  He replied that for
the good of the people he should always endeavour to profit by the
knowledge of the philosophers; but that his own business of sovereign
would always prevent his ranking himself amongst that sect.  The clergy
also took steps to hinder Voltaire’s appearance at Court.  Paris,
however, carried to the highest pitch the honours and enthusiasm shown to
the great poet.
It was very unwise to let Paris pronounce with such transport an opinion
so opposite to that of the Court.  This was pointed out to the Queen,
and she was told that, without conferring on Voltaire the honour of a
presentation, she might see him in the State apartments.  She was not
averse to following this advice, and appeared embarrassed solely about
what she should say to him.  She was recommended to talk about nothing
but the “Henriade,” “Merope,” and “Zaira.”  The Queen replied that she
would still consult a few other persons in whom she had great confidence.
The next day she announced that it was irrevocably decided Voltaire
should not see any member of the royal family,–his writings being too
antagonistic to religion and morals.  “It is, however, strange,” said the
Queen, “that while we refuse to admit Voltaire into our presence as the
leader of philosophical writers, the Marechale de Mouchy should have
presented to me some years ago Madame Geoffrin, who owed her celebrity to
the title of foster-mother of the philosophers.”
On the occasion of the duel of the Comte d’Artois with the Prince de
Bourbon the Queen determined privately to see the Baron de Besenval,
who was to be one of the witnesses, in order to communicate the King’s
intentions.  I have read with infinite pain the manner in which that
simple fact is perverted in the first volume of M. de Besenval’s
"Memoirs.”  He is right in saying that M. Campan led him through the
upper corridors of the Chateau, and introduced him into an apartment
unknown to him; but the air of romance given to the interview is equally
culpable and ridiculous.  M. de Besenval says that he found himself,
without knowing how he came there, in an apartment unadorned, but very
conveniently furnished, of the existence of which he was till then
utterly ignorant.  He was astonished, he adds, not that the Queen should
have so many facilities, but that she should have ventured to procure
them.  Ten printed sheets of the woman Lamotte’s libels contain nothing
so injurious to the character of Marie Antoinette as these lines, written
by a man whom she honoured by undeserved kindness.  He could not have had
any opportunity of knowing the existence of the apartments, which
consisted of a very small antechamber, a bedchamber, and a closet.  Ever
since the Queen had occupied her own apartment, these had been
appropriated to her Majesty’s lady of honour in cases of illness, and
were actually so used when the Queen was confined.  It was so important
that it should not be known the Queen had spoken to the Baron before the
duel that she had determined to go through her inner room into this
little apartment, to which M. Campan was to conduct him.  When men write
of recent times they should be scrupulously exact, and not indulge in
exaggerations or inventions.
The Baron de Besenval appears mightily surprised at the Queen’s sudden
coolness, and refers it to the fickleness of her disposition.  I can
explain the reason for the change by repeating what her Majesty said to
me at the time; and I will not alter one of her expressions.  Speaking of
the strange presumption of men, and the reserve with which women ought
always to treat them, the Queen added that age did not deprive them of
the hope of pleasing, if they retained any agreeable qualities; that she
had treated the Baron de Besenval as a brave Swiss, agreeable, polished,
and witty, whose gray hairs had induced her to look upon him as a man
whom she might see without harm; but that she had been much deceived.
Her Majesty, after having enjoined me to the strictest secrecy, told me
that, finding herself alone with the Baron, he began to address her with
so much gallantry that she was thrown into the utmost astonishment, and
that he was mad enough to fall upon his knees, and make her a declaration
in form.  The Queen added that she said to him: “Rise, monsieur; the King
shall be ignorant of an offence which would disgrace you for ever;” that
the Baron grew pale and stammered apologies; that she left her closet
without saying another word, and that since that time she hardly ever
spoke to him.  “It is delightful to have friends,” said the Queen; “but
in a situation like mine it is sometimes difficult for the friends of our
friends to suit us.”
In the beginning of the year 1778 Mademoiselle d’Eon obtained permission
to return to France, on condition that she should appear there in female
dress.  The Comte de Vergennes entreated my father, M. Genet, chief clerk
of Foreign Affairs, who had long known the Chevalier d’Eon, to receive
that strange personage at his house, to guide and restrain, if possible,
her ardent disposition.  The Queen, on learning her arrival at
Versailles, sent a footman to desire my father to bring her into her
presence; my father thought it his duty first to inform the Minister of
her Majesty’s wish.  The Comte de Vergennes expressed himself pleased
with my father’s prudence, and desired that he would accompany him to the
Queen.  The Minister had a few minutes’ audience; her Majesty came out of
her closet with him, and condescended to express to my father the regret
she felt at having troubled him to no purpose; and added, smiling, that a
few words from M. de Vergennes had for ever cured her of her curiosity.
The discovery in London of the true sex of this pretended woman makes it
probable that the few words uttered by the Minister contained a solution
of the enigma.
The Chevalier d’Eon had been useful in Russia as a spy of Louis XV.
while very young he had found means to introduce himself at the Court of
the Empress Elizabeth, and served that sovereign in the capacity of
reader.  Resuming afterwards his military dress, he served with honour
and was wounded.  Appointed chief secretary of legation, and afterwards
minister plenipotentiary at London, he unpardonably insulted Comte de
Guerchy, the ambassador.  The official order for the Chevalier’s return
to France was actually delivered to the King’s Council; but Louis XV.
delayed the departure of the courier who was to be its bearer, and sent
off another courier privately, who gave the Chevalier d’Eon a letter in
his own writing, in which he said, “I know that you have served me as
effectually in the dress of a woman as in that which you now wear.
Resume it instantly; withdraw into the city; I warn you that the King
yesterday signed an order for your return to France; you are not safe in
your hotel, and you would here find too powerful enemies.”  I heard the
Chevalier d’Eon repeat the contents of this letter, in which Louis XV.
thus separated himself from the King of France, several times at my
father’s.  The Chevalier, or rather the Chevalaere d’Eon had preserved
all the King’s letters.  Messieurs de Maurepas and de Vergennes wished to
get them out of his hands, as they were afraid he would print them.  This
eccentric being had long solicited permission to return to France; but it
was necessary to find a way of sparing the family he had offended the
insult they would see in his return; he was therefore made to resume the
costume of that sex to which in France everything is pardoned.  The
desire to see his native land once more determined him to submit to the
condition, but he revenged himself by combining the long train of his
gown and the three deep ruffles on his sleeves with the attitude and
conversation of a grenadier, which made him very disagreeable company.
     [The account given by Madame Campan of the Chevalier d’Eon is now
     known to be incorrect in many particulars.  Enough details for most
     readers will be found in the Duc de Broglie’s “Secret of the King,"
     vol.  ii., chaps.  vi.  and g., and at p.  89, vol.  ii.  of that
     work, where the Duke refers to the letter of most dubious
     authenticity spoken of by Madame Campan.  The following details will
     be sufficient for these memoirs: The Chevalier Charles d’Eon de
     Beaumont (who was born in 1728) was an ex-captain of dragoons,
     employed in both the open and secret diplomacy of Louis XV.  When at
     the embassy in London he quarrelled with the ambassador, his
     superior, the Comte de Guerchy (Marquis do Nangis), and used his
     possession of papers concerning the secret diplomacy to shield
     himself.  It was when hiding in London, in 1765, on account of this
     business, that he seems first to have assumed woman’s dress, which
     he retained apparently chiefly from love of notoriety.  In 1775 a
     formal agreement with the French Court, made by the instrumentality
     of Beaumarchais, of all people in the world, permitted him to return
     to France, retaining the dress of a woman.  He went back to France,
     but again came to England, and died there, at his residence in
     Millman Street, near the Foundling Hospital, May 22, 1710.  He had
     been a brave and distinguished officer, but his form and a certain
     coldness of temperament always remarked in him assisted him in his
     assumption of another sex.  There appears to be no truth in the
     story of his proceedings at the Russian Court, and his appearing in
     female attire was a surprise to those who must have known of any
     earlier affair of the sort.]
At last, the event so long desired by the Queen, and by all those who
wished her well, took place; her Majesty became enceinte.  The King was
in ecstasies.  Never was there a more united or happier couple.  The
disposition of Louis XVI. entirely altered, and became prepossessing and
conciliatory; and the Queen was amply compensated for the uneasiness
which the King’s indifference during the early part of their union had
caused her.
The summer of 1778 was extremely hot.  July and August passed, but the
air was not cooled by a single storm.  The Queen spent whole days in
close rooms, and could not sleep until she had breathed the fresh night
air, walking with the Princesses and her brothers upon the terrace under
her apartments.  These promenades at first gave rise to no remark; but it
occurred to some of the party to enjoy the music of wind instruments
during these fine summer nights.  The musicians belonging to the chapel
were ordered to perform pieces suited to instruments of that description,
upon steps constructed in the middle of the garden.  The Queen, seated on
one of the terrace benches, enjoyed the effect of this music, surrounded
by all the royal family with the exception of the King, who joined them
but, twice, disliking to change his hour of going to bed.
Nothing could be more innocent than these parties; yet Paris, France,
nay, all Europe, were soon canvassing them in a manner most
disadvantageous to the reputation of Marie Antoinette.  It is true that
all the inhabitants of Versailles enjoyed these serenades, and that there
was a crowd near the spot from eleven at night until two or three in the
morning.  The windows of the ground floor occupied by Monsieur and Madame
–[The wife of Monsieur, the Comte de Provence.]– were kept open, and
the terrace was perfectly well lighted by the numerous wax candles
burning in the two apartments.  Lamps were likewise placed in the garden,
and the lights of the orchestra illuminated the rest of the place.
I do not know whether a few incautious women might not have ventured
farther, and wandered to the bottom of the park; it may have been so; but
the Queen, Madame, and the Comtesse d’Artois were always arm-in-arm, and
never left the terrace.  The Princesses were not remarkable when seated
on the benches, being dressed in cambric muslin gowns, with large straw
hats and muslin veils, a costume universally adopted by women at that
time; but when standing up their different figures always distinguished
them; and the persons present stood on one side to let them pass.  It is
true that when they seated themselves upon the benches private
individuals would sometimes, to their great amusement, sit down by
their side.
A young clerk in the War Department, either not knowing or pretending not
to know the Queen, spoke to her of the beauty of the night, and the
delightful effect of the music.  The Queen, fancying she was not
recognised, amused herself by keeping up the incognito, and they talked
of several private families of Versailles, consisting of persons
belonging to the King’s household or her own.  After a few minutes the
Queen and Princesses rose to walk, and on leaving the bench curtsied to
the clerk.  The young man knowing, or having subsequently discovered,
that he had been conversing with the Queen, boasted of it in his office.
He was merely, desired to hold his tongue; and so little attention did he
excite that the Revolution found him still only a clerk.
Another evening one of Monsieur’s body-guard seated himself near the
Princesses, and, knowing them, left the place where he was sitting, and
placed himself before the Queen, to tell her that he was very fortunate
in being able to seize an opportunity of imploring the kindness of his
sovereign; that he was “soliciting at Court"–at the word soliciting the
Queen and Princesses rose hastily and withdrew into Madame’s apartment.–
[Soulavie has most criminally perverted these two facts.-MADAME CAMPAN.]-
I was at the Queen’s residence that day.  She talked of this little
occurrence all the time of her ’coucher’; though she only complained that
one of Monsieur’s guards should have had the effrontery to speak to her.
Her Majesty added that he ought to have respected her incognito; and that
that was not the place where he should have ventured to make a request.
Madame had recognised him, and talked of making a complaint to his
captain; the Queen opposed it, attributing his error to his ignorance and
provincial origin.
The most scandalous libels were based on these two insignificant
occurrences, which I have related with scrupulous exactness.  Nothing
could be more false than those calumnies.  It must be confessed, however,
that such meetings were liable to ill consequences.  I ventured to say as
much to the Queen, and informed her that one evening, when her Majesty
beckoned to me to go and speak to her, I thought I recognised on the
bench on which she was sitting two women deeply veiled, and keeping
profound silence; that those women were the Comtesse du Barry and her
sister-in-law; and that my suspicions were confirmed, when, at a few
paces from the seat, and nearer to her Majesty, I met a tall footman
belonging to Madame du Barry, whom I had seen in her service all the time
she resided at Court.
My advice was disregarded.  Misled by the pleasure she found in these
promenades, and secure in the consciousness of blameless conduct, the
Queen would not see the lamentable results which must necessarily follow.
This was very unfortunate; for besides the mortifications they brought
upon her, it is highly probable that they prompted the vile plot which
gave rise to the Cardinal de Rohan’s fatal error.
Having enjoyed these evening promenades about a month, the Queen ordered
a private concert within the colonnade which contained the group of Pluto
and Proserpine.  Sentinels were placed at all the entrances, and ordered
to admit within the colonnade only such persons as should produce tickets
signed by my father-in-law.  A fine concert was performed there by the
musicians of the chapel and the female musicians belonging to the.
Queen’s chamber.  The Queen went with Mesdames de Polignac, de Chalon,
and d’Andlau, and Messieurs de Polignac, de Coigny, de Besenval, and de
Vaudreuil; there were also a few equerries present.  Her Majesty gave me
permission to attend the concert with some of my female relations.  There
was no music upon the terrace.  The crowd of inquisitive people, whom the
sentinels kept at a distance from the enclosure of the colonnade, went
away highly discontented; the small number of persons admitted no doubt
occasioned jealousy, and gave rise to offensive comments which were
caught up by the public with avidity.  I do not pretend to apologise for
the kind of amusements with which the Queen indulged herself during this
and the following summer; the consequences were so lamentable that the
error was no doubt very great; but what I have said respecting the
character of these promenades may be relied on as true.
When the season for evening walks was at an end, odious couplets were
circulated in Paris; the ’Queen was treated in them in the most insulting
manner; her situation ranked among her enemies persons attached to the
only prince who for several years had appeared likely to give heirs to
the crown.  People uttered the most inconsiderate language; and those
improper conversations took place in societies wherein the imminent
danger of violating to so criminal an extent both truth and the respect
due to sovereigns ought to have been better understood.  A few days
before the Queen’s confinement a whole volume of manuscript songs,
concerning her and all the ladies about her remarkable for rank or
station was, thrown down in the oiel-de-boeuf.–[A large room at
Versailles lighted by a bull’s-eye window, and used as a waiting-room.]–
This manuscript was immediately put into the hands of the King, who was
highly incensed at it, and said that he had himself been at those
promenades; that he had seen nothing connected with them but what was
perfectly harmless; that such songs would disturb the harmony of twenty
families in the Court and city; that it was a capital crime to have made
any against the Queen herself; and that he wished the author of the
infamous libels to be discovered and punished.  A fortnight afterwards it
was known publicly that the verses were by M. Champcenetz de Riquebourg,
who was not even reprimanded.
     [The author of a great many songs, some of which are very well
     written.  Lively and satirical by nature, he did not lose either his
     cheerfulness or his carelessness before the revolutionary tribunal.
     After hearing his own sentence read, he asked his judges if he might
     not be allowed to find a substitute.–MADAME CAMPAN.]
I knew for a certainty that the King spoke to M. de Maurepas, before two
of his most confidential servants, respecting the risk which he saw the
Queen ran from these night walks upon the terrace of Versailles, which
the public ventured to censure thus openly, and that the old minister had
the cruelty to advise that she should be suffered to go on; she possessed
talent; her friends were very ambitious, and longed to see her take a
part in public affairs; and to let her acquire the reputation of levity
would do no harm.  M. de Vergennes was as hostile to the Queen’s
influence as M. de Maurepas.  It may therefore be fairly presumed, since
the Prime Minister durst point out to his King an advantage to be gained
by the Queen’s discrediting herself, that he and M. de Vergennes employed
all means within the reach of powerful ministers in order to ruin her in
the opinion of the public.
The Queen’s accouchement approached; Te Deums were sung and prayers
offered up in all the cathedrals.  On the 11th of December, 1778, the
royal family, the Princes of the blood, and the great officers of State
passed the night in the rooms adjoining the Queen’s bedchamber.  Madame,
the King’s daughter, came into the world before mid-day on the 19th of
December.–[Marie Therese Charlotte (1778-1861), Madame Royale; married
in 1799 Louis, Duc d’Angouleme, eldest son of the Comte d’Artois.]–
The etiquette of allowing all persons indiscriminately to enter at the
moment of the delivery of a queen was observed with such exaggeration
that when the accoucheur said aloud, “La Reine va s’accoucher,” the
persons who poured into the chamber were so numerous that the rush nearly
destroyed the Queen.  During the night the King had taken the precaution
to have the enormous tapestry screens which surrounded her Majesty’s bed
secured with cords; but for this they certainly would have been thrown
down upon her.  It was impossible to move about the chamber, which was
filled with so motley a crowd that one might have fancied himself in some
place of public amusement.  Two Savoyards got upon the furniture for a
better sight of the Queen, who was placed opposite the fireplace.
The noise and the sex of the infant, with which the Queen was made
acquainted by a signal previously agreed on, as it is said, with the
Princesse do Lamballe, or some error of the accoucheur, brought on
symptoms which threatened fatal consequences; the accoucheur exclaimed,
"Give her air–warm water–she must be bled in the foot!”  The windows
were stopped up; the King opened them with a strength which his affection
for the Queen gave him at the moment.  They were of great height, and
pasted over with strips of paper all round.  The basin of hot water not
being brought quickly enough, the accoucheur desired the chief surgeon to
use his lancet without waiting for it.  He did so; the blood streamed out
freely, and the Queen opened her eyes.  The Princesse de Lamballe was
carried through the crowd in a state of insensibility.  The valets de
chambre and pages dragged out by the collar such inconsiderate persons as
would not leave the room.  This cruel custom was abolished afterwards.
The Princes of the family, the Princes of the blood, the chancellor, and
the ministers are surely sufficient to attest the legitimacy of an
hereditary prince.  The Queen was snatched from the very jaws of death;
she was not conscious of having been bled, and on being replaced in bed
asked why she had a linen bandage upon her foot.
The delight which succeeded the moment of fear was equally lively and
sincere.  We were all embracing each other, and shedding tears of joy.
The Comte d’Esterhazy and the Prince de Poix, to whom I was the first to
announce that the Queen was restored to life, embraced me in the midst of
the cabinet of nobles.  We little imagined, in our happiness at her
escape from death, for how much more terrible a fate our beloved Princess
was reserved.
NOTE.  The two following specimens of the Emperor Joseph’s correspondence
forcibly demonstrate the vigour, shrewdness, and originality of his mind,
and complete the portrait left of him by Madame Campan.
Few sovereigns have given their reasons for refusing appointments with
the fullness and point of the following letter
                                To a Lady.
MADAM.–I do not think that it is amongst the duties of a monarch to
grant places to one of his subjects merely because he is a gentleman.
That, however, is the inference from the request you have made to me.
Your late husband was, you say, a distinguished general, a gentleman of
good family, and thence you conclude that my kindness to your family can
do no less than give a company of foot to your second son, lately
returned from his travels.
Madam, a man may be the son of a general and yet have no talent for
command.  A man may be of a good family and yet possess no other merit
than that which he owes to chance,–the name of gentleman.
I know your son, and I know what makes the soldier; and this twofold
knowledge convinces me that your son has not the disposition of a
warrior, and that he is too full of his birth to leave the country a hope
of his ever rendering it any important service.
What you are to be pitied for, madam, is, that your son is not fit either
for an officer, a statesman or a priest; in a word, that he is nothing
more than a gentleman in the most extended acceptation of the word.
You may be thankful to that destiny, which, in refusing talents to your
son, has taken care to put him in possession of great wealth, which will
sufficiently compensate him for other deficiencies, and enable him at the
same time to dispense with any favour from me.
I hope you will be impartial enough to see the reasons which prompt me to
refuse your request.  It may be disagreeable to you, but I consider it
necessary.  Farewell, madam.–Your sincere well-wisher,
                                                       JOSEPH
LACHSENBURG, 4th August, 1787.
The application of another anxious and somewhat covetous mother was
answered with still more decision and irony:
                                To a Lady.
MADAM.–You know my disposition; you are not ignorant that the society of
the ladies is to me a mere recreation, and that I have never sacrificed
my principles to the fair sex.  I pay but little attention to
recommendations, and I only take them into consideration when the person
in whose behalf I may be solicited possesses real merit.
Two of your sons are already loaded with favours.  The eldest, who is not
yet twenty, is chief of a squadron in my army, and the younger has
obtained a canonry at Cologne, from the Elector, my brother.  What would
you have more?  Would you have the first a general and the second a
bishop?
In France you may see colonels in leading-strings, and in Spain the royal
princes command armies even at eighteen; hence Prince Stahremberg forced
them to retreat so often that they were never able all the rest of their
lives to comprehend any other manoeuvre.
It is necessary to be sincere at Court, and severe in the field, stoical
without obduracy, magnanimous without weakness, and to gain the esteem of
our enemies by the justice of our actions; and this, madam, is what I aim
at.
                                             JOSEPH
VIENNA, September, 1787.
(From the inedited Letters of Joseph IL, published at Paris, by Persan,
1822.)
During the alarm for the life of the Queen, regret at not possessing an
heir to the throne was not even thought of.  The King himself was wholly
occupied with the care of preserving an adored wife.  The young Princess
was presented to her mother.  “Poor little one,” said the Queen, “you
were not wished for, but you are not on that account less dear to me.  A
son would have been rather the property of the State.  You shall be mine;
you shall have my undivided care, shall share all my happiness, and
console me in all my troubles.”
The King despatched a courier to Paris, and wrote letters himself to
Vienna, by the Queen’s bedside; and part of the rejoicings ordered took
place in the capital.
A great number of attendants watched near the Queen during the first
nights of her confinement.  This custom distressed her; she knew how to
feel for others, and ordered large armchairs for her women, the backs of
which were capable of being let down by springs, and which served
perfectly well instead of beds.
M. de Lassone, the chief physician, the chief surgeon, the chief
apothecary, the principal officers of the buttery, etc., were likewise
nine nights without going to bed.  The royal children were watched for a
long time, and one of the women on duty remained, nightly, up and
dressed, during the first three years from their birth.
The Queen made her entry into Paris for the churching.  One hundred
maidens were portioned and married at Notre-Dame.  There were few popular
acclamations, but her Majesty was perfectly well received at the Opera.
A few days after the Queen’s recovery from her confinement, the Cure of
the Magdelaine de la City at Paris wrote to M. Campan and requested a
private interview with him; it was to desire he would deliver into the
hands of the Queen a little box containing her wedding ring, with this
note written by the Cure: “I have received under the seal of confession
the ring which I send to your Majesty; with an avowal that it was stolen
from you in 1771, in order to be used in sorceries, to prevent your
having any children.”  On seeing her ring again the Queen said that she
had in fact lost it about seven years before, while washing her hands,
and that she had resolved to use no endeavour to discover the
superstitious woman who had done her the injury.
The Queen’s attachment to the Comtesse Jules increased every day; she
went frequently to her house at Paris, and even took up her own abode at
the Chateau de la Muette to be nearer during her confinement.  She
married Mademoiselle de Polignac, when scarcely thirteen years of age, to
M. de Grammont, who, on account of this marriage, was made Duc de Guiche,
and captain of the King’s Guards, in reversion after the Duc de Villeroi.
The Duchesse de Civrac, Madame Victoire’s dame d’honneur, had been
promised the place for the Duc de Lorges, her son.  The number of
discontented families at Court increased.
The title of favourite was too openly given to the Comtesse Jules by her
friends.  The lot of the favourite of a queen is not, in France, a happy
one; the favourites of kings are treated, out of gallantry, with much
greater indulgence.
A short time after the birth of Madame the Queen became again enceinte;
she had mentioned it only to the King, to her physician, and to a few
persons honoured with her intimate confidence, when, having overexerted
her strength in pulling lip one of the glasses of her carriage, she felt
that she had hurt herself, and eight days afterwards she miscarried.  The
King spent the whole morning at her bedside, consoling her, and
manifesting the tenderest concern for her.  The Queen wept exceedingly;
the King took her affectionately in his arms, and mingled his tears with
hers.  The King enjoined silence among the small number of persons who
were informed of this unfortunate occurrence; and it remained generally
unknown.  These particulars furnish an accurate idea of the manner in
which this august couple lived together.
The Empress Maria Theresa did not enjoy the happiness of seeing her
daughter give an heir to the crown of France.  That illustrious Princess
died at the close of 1780, after having proved by her example that, as in
the instance of Queen Blanche, the talents of a sovereign might be
blended with the virtues of a pious princess.  The King was deeply
affected at the death of the Empress; and on the arrival of the courier
from Vienna said that he could not bring himself to afflict the Queen by
informing her of an event which grieved even him so much.  His Majesty
thought the Abbe de Vermond, who had possessed the confidence of Maria
Theresa during his stay at Vienna, the most proper person to discharge
this painful duty.  He sent his first valet de chambre, M. de Chamilly,
to the Abbe on the evening of the day he received the despatches from
Vienna, to order him to come the next day to the Queen before her
breakfast hour, to acquit himself discreetly of the afflicting commission
with which he was charged, and to let his Majesty know the moment of his
entering the Queen’s chamber.  It was the King’s intention to be there
precisely a quarter of an hour after him, and he was punctual to his
time; he was announced; the Abbe came out; and his Majesty said to him,
as he drew up at the door to let him pass, “I thank you, Monsieur l’Abbe,
for the service you have just done me.”  This was the only time during
nineteen years that the King spoke to him.
Within an hour after learning the event the Queen put on temporary
mourning, while waiting until her Court mourning should be ready; she
kept herself shut up in her apartments for several days; went out only to
mass; saw none but the royal family; and received none but the Princesse
de Lamballe and the Duchesse de Polignac.  She talked incessantly of the
courage, the misfortunes, the successes, and the virtues of her mother.
The shroud and dress in which Maria Theresa was to be buried, made
entirely by her own hands, were found ready prepared in one of her
closets.  She often regretted that the numerous duties of her august
mother had prevented her from watching in person over the education of
her daughters; and modestly said that she herself would have been more
worthy if she had had the good fortune to receive lessons directly from a
sovereign so enlightened and so deserving of admiration.
The Queen told me one day that her mother was left a widow at an age when
her beauty was yet striking; that she was secretly informed of a plot
laid by her three principal ministers to make themselves agreeable to
her; of a compact made between them, that the losers should not feel any
jealousy towards him who should be fortunate enough to gain his
sovereign’s heart; and that they had sworn that the successful one should
be always the friend of the other two.  The Empress being assured of this
scheme, one day after the breaking up of the council over which she had
presided, turned the conversation upon the subject of female sovereigns,
and the duties of their sex and rank; and then applying her general
reflections to herself in particular, told them that she hoped to guard
herself all her life against weaknesses of the heart; but that if ever an
irresistible feeling should make her alter her resolution, it should be
only in favour of a man proof against ambition, not engaged in State
affairs, but attached only to a private life and its calm enjoyments,–in
a word, if her heart should betray her so far as to lead her to love a
man invested with any important office, from the moment he should
discover her sentiments he would forfeit his place and his influence with
the public.  This was sufficient; the three ministers, more ambitious
than amorous, gave up their projects for ever.
On the 22d of October, 1781, the Queen gave birth to a Dauphin.–
[The first Dauphin, Louis, born 1781, died 1789.]–So deep a silence
prevailed in the room that the Queen thought her child was a daughter;
but after the Keeper of the Seals had declared the sex of the infant, the
King went up to the Queen’s bed, and said to her, “Madame, you have
fulfilled my wishes and those of France:, you are the mother of a
Dauphin.”  The King’s joy was boundless; tears streamed from his eyes; he
gave his hand to every one present; and his happiness carried away his
habitual reserve.  Cheerful and affable, he was incessantly taking
occasion to introduce the words, “my son,” or “the Dauphin.”  As soon as
the Queen was in bed, she wished to see the long-looked-for infant.  The
Princesse de Guemenee brought him to her.  The Queen said there was no
need for commending him to the Princess, but in order to enable her to
attend to him more freely, she would herself share the care of the
education of her daughter.  When the Dauphin was settled in his
apartment, he received the customary homages and visits.  The Duc
d’Angouleme,  meeting his father at the entrance of the Dauphin’s
apartment, said to him, “Oh, papa! how little my cousin is!"–"The day
will come when you will think him great enough, my dear,” answered the
Prince, almost involuntarily.–[Eldest son of the Comte d’Artois, and
till the birth of the Dauphin with near prospects of the succession.]
The birth of the Dauphin appeared to give joy to all classes.  Men
stopped one another in the streets, spoke without being acquainted,
and those who were acquainted embraced each other.  In the birth of a
legitimate heir to the sovereign every man beholds a pledge of prosperity
and tranquillity .
     [M. Merard de Saint Just made a quatrain on the birth of the Dauphin
     to the following effect:
          “This infant Prince our hopes are centred in,
          will doubtless make us happy, rich, and free;
          And since with somebody he must begin,
          My fervent prayer is–that it may be me!”
     –note By the Editor.]
The rejoicings were splendid and ingenious.  The artificers and tradesmen
of Paris spent considerable sums in order to go to Versailles in a body,
with their various insignia.  Almost every troop had music with it.  When
they arrived at the court of the palace, they there arranged themselves
so as to present a most interesting living picture.  Chimney-sweepers,
quite as well dressed as those that appear upon the stage, carried an
ornamented chimney, at the top of which was perched one of the smallest
of their fraternity.  The chairmen carried a sedan highly gilt, in which
were to be seen a handsome nurse and a little Dauphin.  The butchers made
their appearance with their fat ox.  Cooks, masons, blacksmiths, all
trades were on the alert.  The smiths hammered away upon an anvil, the
shoemakers finished off a little pair of boots for the Dauphin, and the
tailors a little suit of the uniform of his regiment.  The King remained
a long time upon a balcony to enjoy the sight.  The whole Court was
delighted with it.  So general was the enthusiasm that (the police not
having carefully examined the procession) the grave-diggers had the
imprudence to send their deputation also, with the emblematic devices of
their ill-omened occupation.  They were met by the Princesse Sophie, the
King’s aunt, who was thrilled with horror at the sight, and entreated the
King to have the audacious, fellows driven out of the procession, which
was then drawing up on the terrace.
The ’dames de la halle’ came to congratulate the Queen, and were received
with the suitable ceremonies.
Fifty of them appeared dressed in black silk gowns, the established full
dress of their order, and almost all wore diamonds.  The Princesse de
Chimay went to the door of the Queen’s bedroom to receive three of these
ladies, who were led up to the Queen’s bed.  One of them addressed her
Majesty in a speech written by M. de la Harpe.  It was set down on the
inside of a fan, to which the speaker repeatedly referred, but without
any embarrassment.  She was handsome, and had a remarkably fine voice.
The Queen was affected by the address, and answered it with great
affability,–wishing a distinction to be made between these women and the
poissardes, who always left a disagreeable impression on her mind.
The King ordered a substantial repast for all these women.  One of his
Majesty’s maitres d’hotel, wearing his hat, sat as president and did the
honours of the table.  The public were admitted, and numbers of people
had the curiosity to go.
The Garden-du-Corps obtained the King’s permission to give the Queen a
dress ball in the great hall of the Opera at Versailles.  Her Majesty
opened the ball in a minuet with a private selected by the corps, to whom
the King granted the baton of an exempt.  The fete was most splendid.
All then was joy, happiness, and peace.
The Dauphin was a year old when the Prince de Guemenee’s bankruptcy
compelled the Princess, his wife, who was governess to the children of
France, to resign her situation.
The Queen was at La Muette for the inoculation of her daughter.  She sent
for me, and condescended to say she wished to converse with me about a
scheme which delighted her, but in the execution of which she foresaw
some inconveniences.  Her plan was to appoint the Duchesse de Polignac to
the office lately held by the Princesse de Guemenee.  She saw with
extreme pleasure the facilities which this appointment would give her for
superintending the education of her children, without running any risk of
hurting the pride of the governess; and that it would bring together the
objects of her warmest affections, her children and her friend.  “The
friends of the Duchesse de Polignac,” continued the Queen, “will be
gratified by the splendour and importance conferred by the employment.
As to the Duchess, I know her; the place by no means suits her simple and
quiet habits, nor the sort of indolence of her disposition.  She will
give me the greatest possible proof of her devotion if she yields to my
wish.”  The Queen also spoke of the Princesse de Chimay and the Duchesse
de Duras, whom the public pointed out as fit for the post; but she
thought the Princesse de Chimay’s piety too rigid; and as to the Duchesse
de Duras, her wit and learning quite frightened her.  What the Queen
dreaded as the consequence of her selection of the Duchesse de Polignac
was principally the jealousy of the courtiers; but she showed so lively a
desire to see her scheme executed that I had no doubt she would soon set
at naught all the obstacles she discovered.  I was not mistaken; a few
days afterwards the Duchess was appointed governess.
The Queen’s object in sending for me was no doubt to furnish me with the
means of explaining the feelings which induced her to prefer a governess
disposed by friendship to suffer her to enjoy all the privileges of a
mother.  Her Majesty knew that I saw a great deal of company.
The Queen frequently dined with the Duchess after having been present at
the King’s private dinner.  Sixty-one thousand francs were therefore
added to the salary of the governess as a compensation for this increase
of expense.
The Queen was tired of the excursions to Marly, and had no great
difficulty in setting the King against them.  He did not like the expense
of them, for everybody was entertained there gratis.  Louis XIV. had
established a kind of parade upon these excursions, differing from that
of Versailles, but still more annoying.  Card and supper parties occurred
every day, and required much dress.  On Sundays and holidays the
fountains played, the people were admitted into the gardens, and there
was as great a crowd as at the fetes of St. Cloud.
Every age has its peculiar colouring; Marly showed that of Louis XIV.
even more than Versailles.  Everything in the former place appeared to
have been produced by the magic power of a fairy’s wand.  Not the
slightest trace of all this splendour remains; the revolutionary spoilers
even tore up the pipes which served to supply the fountains.  Perhaps a
brief description of this palace and the usages established there by
Louis XIV.  may be acceptable.
The very extensive gardens of Marly ascended almost imperceptibly to the
Pavilion of the Sun., which was occupied only by the King and his family.
The pavilions of the twelve zodiacal signs bounded the two sides of the
lawn.  They were connected by bowers impervious to the rays of the sun.
The pavilions nearest to that of the sun were reserved for the Princes of
the blood and the ministers; the rest were occupied by persons holding
superior offices at Court, or invited to stay at Marly.  Each pavilion
was named after fresco paintings, which covered its walls, and which had
been executed by the most celebrated artists of the age of Louis XIV.
On a line with the upper pavilion there was on the left a chapel; on the
right a pavilion called La Perspective, which concealed along suite of
offices, containing a hundred lodging-rooms intended for the persons
belonging to the service of the Court, kitchens, and spacious dining-
rooms, in which more than thirty tables were splendidly laid out.
During half of Louis XV.’s reign the ladies still wore the habit de cour
de Marly, so named by Louis XIV., and which differed little from, that
devised for Versailles.  The French gown, gathered in the back, and with
great hoops, replaced this dress, and continued to be worn till the end
of the reign of Louis XVI.  The diamonds, feathers, rouge, and
embroidered stuffs spangled with gold, effaced all trace of a rural
residence; but the people loved to see the splendour of their sovereign
and a brilliant Court glittering in the shades of the woods.
After dinner, and before the hour for cards, the Queen, the Princesses,
and their ladies, paraded among the clumps of trees, in little carriages,
beneath canopies richly embroidered with gold, drawn by men in the King’s
livery.  The trees planted by Louis XIV. were of prodigious height,
which, however, was surpassed in several of the groups by fountains of
the clearest water; while, among others, cascades over white marble, the
waters of which, met by the sunbeams, looked like draperies of silver
gauze, formed a contrast to the solemn darkness of the groves.
In the evening nothing more was necessary for any well-dressed man to
procure admission to the Queen’s card parties than to be named and
presented, by some officer of the Court, to the gentleman usher of the
card-room.  This room, which was very, large, and of octagonal shape,
rose to the top of the Italian roof, and terminated in a cupola furnished
with balconies, in which ladies who had not been presented easily
obtained leave to place themselves, and enjoy, the sight of the brilliant
assemblage.
Though not of the number of persons belonging to the Court, gentlemen
admitted into this salon might request one of the ladies seated with the
Queen at lansquenet or faro to bet upon her cards with such gold or notes
as they presented to her.  Rich people and the gamblers of Paris did not
miss one of the evenings at the Marly salon, and there were always
considerable sums won and lost.  Louis XVI.  hated high play, and very
often showed displeasure when the loss of large sums was mentioned.  The
fashion of wearing a black coat without being in mourning had not then
been introduced, and the King gave a few of his ’coups de boutoir’ to
certain chevaliers de St. Louis, dressed in this manner, who came to
venture two or three louis, in the hope that fortune would favour the
handsome duchesses who deigned to place them on their cards.
     [Bachaumont in his “Memoirs,” (tome xii., p. 189), which are often
     satirical; and always somewhat questionable, speaks of the singular
     precautions taken at play at Court.  “The bankers at the Queen’s
     table,” says he, “in order to prevent the mistakes [I soften the
     harshness of his expression] which daily happen, have obtained
     permission from her Majesty that before beginning to play the table
     shall be bordered by a ribbon entirely round it, and that no other
     money than that upon the cards beyond the ribbon shall be considered
     as staked."–NOTE By THE EDITOR.]
Singular contrasts are often seen amidst the grandeur of courts.  In
order to manage such high play at the Queen’s faro table, it was
necessary to have a banker provided with large, sums of money; and this
necessity placed at the table, to which none but the highest titled
persons were admitted in general, not only M. de Chalabre, who was its
banker, but also a retired captain of foot, who officiated as his second.
A word, trivial, but perfectly appropriate to express the manner in which
the Court was attended there, was often heard.  Gentlemen presented at
Court, who had not been invited to stay at Marly, came there
notwithstanding, as they did to Versailles, and returned again to Paris;
under such circumstances, it was said such a one had been to Marly only
’en polisson’;–[A contemptuous expression, meaning literally “as a
scamp” or “rascal"]–and it appeared odd to hear a captivating marquis,
in answer to the inquiry whether he was of the royal party at Marly, say,
"No, I am only here ’en polisson’,” meaning simply “I am here on the
footing of all those whose nobility is of a later date than 1400.”  The
Marly excursions were exceedingly expensive to the King.  Besides the
superior tables, those of the almoners, equerries, maitres d’hotel, etc.,
were all supplied with such a degree of magnificence as to allow of
inviting strangers to them; and almost all the visitors from Paris were
boarded at the expense of the Court.
The personal frugality of the unfortunate Prince who sank beneath the
weight of the national debts thus favoured the Queen’s predilection for
her Petit Trianon; and for five or six years preceding the Revolution the
Court very seldom visited Marly.
The King, always attentive to the comfort of his family, gave Mesdames,
his aunts, the use of the Chateau de Bellevue, and afterwards purchased
the Princesse de Guemenee’s house, at the entrance to Paris, for
Elisabeth.  The Comtesse de Provence bought a small house at Montreuil;
Monsieur already had Brunoy; the Comtesse d’Artois built Bagatelle;
Versailles became, in the estimation of all the royal family, the least
agreeable of residences.  They only fancied themselves at home in the
plainest houses, surrounded by English gardens, where they better enjoyed
the beauties of nature.  The taste for cascades and statues was entirely
past.
The Queen occasionally remained a whole month at Petit Trianon, and had
established there all the ways of life in a chateau.  She entered the
sitting-room without driving the ladies from their pianoforte or
embroidery.  The gentlemen continued their billiards or backgammon
without suffering her presence to interrupt them.  There was but little
room in the small Chateau of Trianon.  Madame Elisabeth accompanied the
Queen there, but the ladies of honour and ladies of the palace had no
establishment at Trianon.  When invited by the Queen, they came from
Versailles to dinner.  The King and Princes came regularly to sup.  A
white gown, a gauze kerchief, and a straw hat were the uniform dress of
the Princesses.
     [The extreme simplicity of the Queen’s toilet began to be strongly
     censured, at first among the courtiers, and afterwards throughout
     the kingdom; and through one of those inconsistencies more common in
     France than elsewhere, while the Queen was blamed, she was blindly
     imitated.  There was not a woman but would have the same undress,
     the same cap, and the same feathers as she had been seen to wear.
     They crowded to Mademoiselle Bertin, her milliner; there was an
     absolute revolution in the dress of our ladies, which gave
     importance to that woman.  Long trains, and all those fashions which
     confer a certain nobility on dress, were discarded; and at last a
     duchess could not be distinguished from an actress.  The men caught
     the mania; the upper classes had long before given up to their
     lackeys feathers, tufts of ribbon, and laced hats.  They now got rid
     of red heels and embroidery; and walked about our streets in plain
     cloth, short thick shoes, and with knotty cudgels in their hands.
     Many humiliating scrapes were the consequence of this metamorphosis.
     Bearing no mark to distinguish them from the common herd, some of
     the lowest classes got into quarrels with them, in which the nobles
     had not always the best of it.–MONTJOIE, “History of Marie
     Antoinette."]
Examining all the manufactories of the hamlet, seeing the cows milked,
and fishing in the lake delighted the Queen; and every year she showed
increased aversion to the pompous excursions to Marly.
The idea of acting comedies, as was then done in almost all country
houses, followed on the Queen’s wish to live at Trianon without ceremony.
     [The Queen got through the characters she assumed indifferently
     enough; she could hardly be ignorant of this, as her performances
     evidently excited little pleasure.  Indeed, one day while she was
     thus exhibiting, somebody ventured to say, by no means inaudibly,
     “well, this is royally ill played!”  The lesson was thrown away upon
     her, for never did she sacrifice to the opinion of another that
     which she thought permissible.  When she was told that her extreme
     plainness in dress, the nature of her amusements, and her dislike to
     that splendour which ought always to attend a Queen, had an
     appearance of levity, which was misinterpreted by a portion of the
     public, she replied with Madame de Maintenon: “I am upon the stage,
     and of course I shall be either hissed or applauded.”  Louis XIV.
     had a similar taste; he danced upon the stage; but he had shown by
     brilliant actions that he knew how to enforce respect; and besides,
     he unhesitatingly gave up the amusement from the moment he heard
     those beautiful lines in which Racine pointed out how very unworthy
     of him such pastimes were.–MONTJOIE, “History of Marie
     Antoinette."]
It was agreed that no young man except the Comte d’Artois should be
admitted into the company of performers, and that the audience should
consist only of the King, Monsieur, and the Princesses, who did not play;
but in order to stimulate the actors a little, the first boxes were to be
occupied by the readers, the Queen’s ladies, their sisters and daughters,
making altogether about forty persons.
The Queen laughed heartily at the voice of M. d’Adhemar, formerly a very
fine one, but latterly become rather tremulous.  His shepherd’s dress in
Colin, in the “Devin du Village,” contrasted very ridiculously with his
time of life, and the Queen said it would be difficult for malevolence
itself to find anything to criticise in the choice of such a lover.
The King was highly amused with these plays, and was present at every
performance.  Caillot, a celebrated actor, who had long quitted the
stage, and Dazincourt, both of acknowledged good character, were selected
to give lessons, the first in comic opera, of which the easier sorts were
preferred, and the second in comedy.  The office of hearer of rehearsals,
prompter, and stage manager was given to my father-in-law.  The Duc de
Fronsac, first gentleman of the chamber, was much hurt at this.  He
thought himself called upon to make serious remonstrances upon the
subject, and wrote to the Queen, who made him the following answer: “You
cannot be first gentleman when we are the actors.  Besides, I have
already intimated to you my determination respecting Trianon.  I hold no
court there, I live like a private person, and M. Campan shall be always
employed to execute orders relative to the private fetes I choose to give
there.”  This not putting a stop to the Duke’s remonstrances, the King
was obliged to interfere.  The Duke continued obstinate, and insisted
that he was entitled to manage the private amusements as much as those
which were public.  It became absolutely necessary to end the argument in
a positive manner.
The diminutive Duc de Fronsac never failed, when he came to pay his
respects to the Queen at her toilet, to turn the conversation upon
Trianon, in order to make some ironical remarks on my father-in-law, of
whom, from the time of his appointment, he always spoke as “my colleague
Campan.”  The Queen would shrug her shoulders, and say, when he was gone,
"It is quite shocking to find so little a man in the son of the Marechal
de Richelieu.”
So long as no strangers were admitted to the performances they were but
little censured; but the praise obtained by the performers made them look
for a larger circle of admirers.  The company, for a private company, was
good enough, and the acting was applauded to the skies; nevertheless, as
the audience withdrew, adverse criticisms were occasionally heard.  The
Queen permitted the officers of the Body Guards and the equerries of the
King and Princes to be present at the plays.  Private boxes were provided
for some of the people belonging to the Court; a few more ladies were
invited; and claims arose on all sides for the favour of admission.  The
Queen refused to admit the officers of the body guards of the Princes,
the officers of the King’s Cent Suisses, and many other persons, who were
highly mortified at the refusal.
While delight at having given an heir to the throne of the Bourbons, and
a succession of fetes and amusements, filled up the happy days of Marie
Antoinette, the public was engrossed by the Anglo-American war.  Two
kings, or rather their ministers, planted and propagated the love of
liberty in the new world; the King of England, by shutting his ears and
his heart against the continued and respectful representations of
subjects at a distance from their native land, who had become numerous,
rich, and powerful, through the resources of the soil they had
fertilised; and the King of France, by giving support to this people in
rebellion against their ancient sovereign.  Many young soldiers,
belonging to the first families of the country, followed La Fayette’s
example, and forsook luxury, amusement, and love, to go and tender their
aid to the revolted Americans.  Beaumarchais, secretly seconded by
Messieurs de Maurepas and de Vergennes, obtained permission to send out
supplies of arms and clothing.  Franklin appeared at Court in the dress
of an American agriculturist.  His unpowdered hair, his round hat, his
brown cloth coat formed a contrast to the laced and embroidered coats and
the powder and perfume of the courtiers of Versailles.  This novelty
turned the light heads of the Frenchwomen.  Elegant entertainments were
given to Doctor Franklin, who, to the reputation of a man of science,
added the patriotic virtues which invested him with the character of an
apostle of liberty.  I was present at one of these entertainments, when
the most beautiful woman out of three hundred was selected to place a
crown of laurels upon the white head of the American philosopher, and two
kisses upon his cheeks.  Even in the palace of Versailles Franklin’s
medallion was sold under the King’s eyes, in the exhibition of Sevres
porcelain.  The legend of this medallion was
          “Eripuit coelo fulmen, sceptrumque tyrannis.”
The King never declared his opinion upon an enthusiasm which his correct
judgment no doubt led him to blame.  The Queen spoke out more plainly
about the part France was taking respecting the independence of the
American colonies, and constantly opposed it.  Far was she from
foreseeing that a revolution at–such a distance could excite one in
which a misguided populace would drag her from her palace to a death
equally unjust and cruel.  She only saw something ungenerous in the
method which France adopted of checking the power of England.
However, as Queen of France, she enjoyed the sight of a whole people
rendering homage to the prudence, courage, and good qualities of a young
Frenchman; and she shared the enthusiasm inspired by the conduct and
military success of the Marquis de La Fayette.  The Queen granted him
several audiences on his first return from America, and, until the 10th
of August, on which day my house was plundered, I preserved some lines
from Gaston and Bayard, in which the friends of M. de La Fayette saw the
exact outline of his character, written by her own hand:
         “Why talk of youth,
          When all the ripe experience of the old
          Dwells with him?  In his schemes profound and cool,
          He acts with wise precaution, and reserves
          For time of action his impetuous fire.
          To guard the camp, to scale the leaguered wall,
          Or dare the hottest of the fight, are toils
          That suit th’ impetuous bearing of his youth;
          Yet like the gray-hair’d veteran he can shun
          The field of peril.  Still before my eyes
          I place his bright example, for I love
          His lofty courage, and his prudent thought.
          Gifted like him, a warrior has no age.”
     [During the American war a general officer in the service of the
     United States advanced with a score of men under the English
     batteries to reconnoitre their position.  His aide-de-camp, struck
     by a ball, fell at his side.  The officers and orderly dragoons fled
     precipitately.  The general, though under the fire of the cannon,
     approached the wounded man to see whether any help could be afforded
     him.  Finding the wound had been mortal, he slowly rejoined the
     group which had got out of the reach of the cannon.  This instance
     of courage and humanity took place at the battle of Monmouth.
     General Clinton, who commanded the English troops, knew that the
     Marquis de La Fayette generally rode a white horse; it was upon a
     white horse that the general officer who retired so slowly was
     mounted; Clinton desired the gunners not to fire.  This noble
     forbearance probably saved M. de La Fayette’s life, for he it was.
     At that time he was but twenty-two years of age.–"Historical
     Anecdotes of the Reign of Louis XVI."]
These lines had been applauded and encored at the French theatre;
everybody’s head was turned.  There was no class of persons that did not
heartily approve of the support given openly by the French Government to
the cause of American independence.  The constitution planned for the new
nation was digested at Paris, and while liberty, equality, and the rights
of man were commented upon by the Condorcets, Baillys, Mirabeaus, etc.,
the minister Segur published the King’s edict, which, by repealing that
of 1st November, 1750, declared all officers not noble by four
generations incapable of filling the rank of captain, and denied all
military rank to the roturiers, excepting sons of the chevaliers de St.
Louis.
     ["M. de Segur,” says Chamfort, “having published an ordinance which
     prohibited the admission of any other than gentlemen into the
     artillery corps, and, on the other hand, none but well-educated
     persons being proper for admission, a curious scene took place: the
     Abbe Bossat, examiner of the pupils, gave certificates only to
     plebeians, while Cherin gave them only to gentlemen.  Out of one
     hundred pupils, there were not above four or five who were qualified
     in both respects."]
The injustice and absurdity of this law was no doubt a secondary cause of
the Revolution.  To understand the despair and rage with which this law
inspired the Tiers Etat one should have belonged to that honourable
class.  The provinces were full of roturier families, who for ages had
lived as people of property upon their own domains, and paid the taxes.
If these persons had several sons, they would place one in the King’s
service, one in the Church, another in the Order of Malta as a chevalier
servant d’armes, and one in the magistracy; while the eldest preserved
the paternal manor, and if he were situated in a country celebrated for
wine, he would, besides selling his own produce, add a kind of commission
trade in the wines of the canton.  I have seen an individual of this
justly respected class, who had been long employed in diplomatic
business, and even honoured with the title of minister plenipotentiary,
the son-in-law and nephew of colonels and town mayors, and, on his
mother’s side, nephew of a lieutenant-general with a cordon rouge, unable
to introduce his sons as sous-lieutenants into a regiment of foot.
Another decision of the Court, which could not be announced by an edict,
was that all ecclesiastical benefices, from the humblest priory up to the
richest abbey, should in future be appanages of the nobility.  Being the
son of a village surgeon, the Abbe de Vermond, who had great influence in
the disposition of benefices, was particularly struck with the justice of
this decree.
During the absence of the Abbe in an excursion he made for his health, I
prevailed on the Queen to write a postscript to the petition of a cure,
one of my friends, who was soliciting a priory near his curacy, with the
intention of retiring to it.  I obtained it for him.  On the Abbe’s
return he told me very harshly that I should act in a manner quite
contrary to the King’s wishes if I again obtained such a favour; that the
wealth of the Church was for the future to be invariably devoted to the
support of the poorer nobility; that it was the interest of the State
that it should be so; and a plebeian priest, happy in a good curacy, had
only to remain curate.
Can we be astonished at the part shortly afterwards taken by the deputies
of the Third Estate, when called to the States General?
About the close of the last century several of the Northern sovereigns
took a fancy for travelling.  Christian III., King of Denmark, visited
the Court of France in 1763, during the reign of Louis XV.  We have seen
the King of Sweden and Joseph II.  at Versailles.  The Grand Duke of
Russia (afterwards Paul I.), son of Catherine II., and the Princess of
Wurtemberg, his wife, likewise resolved to visit France.  They travelled
under the titles of the Comte and Comtesse du Nord.  They were presented
on the 20th of May, 1782.  The Queen received them with grace and
dignity.  On the day of their arrival at Versailles they dined in private
with the King and Queen.
The plain, unassuming appearance of Paul I. pleased Louis XVI.  He spoke
to him with more confidence and cheerfulness than he had spoken to Joseph
II.  The Comtesse du Nord was not at first so successful with the Queen.
This lady was of a fine height, very fat for her age, with all the German
stiffness, well informed, and perhaps displaying her acquirements with
rather too much confidence.  When the Comte and Comtesse du Nord were
presented the Queen was exceedingly nervous.  She withdrew into her
closet before she went into the room where she was to dine with the
illustrious travellers, and asked for a glass of water, confessing “she
had just experienced how much more difficult it was to play the part of a
queen in the presence of other sovereigns, or of princes born to become
so, than before courtiers.”  She soon recovered from her confusion, and
reappeared with ease and confidence.  The dinner was tolerably cheerful,
and the conversation very animated.
Brilliant entertainments were given at Court in honour of the King of
Sweden and the Comte du Nord.  They were received in private by the King
and Queen, but they were treated with much more ceremony than the
Emperor, and their Majesties always appeared to me to be very, cautious
before these personages.  However, the King one day asked the Russian
Grand Duke if it were true that he could not rely on the fidelity of any
one of those who accompanied him.  The Prince answered him without
hesitation, and before a considerable number of persons, that he should
be very sorry to have with him even a poodle that was much attached to
him, because his mother would take care to have it thrown into the Seine,
with a stone round its neck, before he should leave Paris.  This reply,
which I myself heard, horrified me, whether it depicted the disposition
of Catherine, or only expressed the Prince’s prejudice against her.
The Queen gave the Grand Duke a supper at Trianon, and had the gardens
illuminated as they had been for the Emperor.  The Cardinal de Rohan very
indiscreetly ventured to introduce himself there without the Queen’s
knowledge.  Having been treated with the utmost coolness ever since his
return from Vienna, he had not dared to ask her himself for permission to
see the illumination; but he persuaded the porter of Trianon to admit him
as soon as the Queen should have set off for Versailles, and his Eminence
engaged to remain in the porter’s lodge until all the carriages should
have left the chateau.  He did not keep his word, and while the porter
was busy in the discharge of his duty, the Cardinal, who wore his red
stockings and had merely thrown on a greatcoat, went down into the
garden, and, with an air of mystery, drew up in two different places to
see the royal family and suite pass by.
Her Majesty was highly offended at this piece of boldness, and next day
ordered the porter to be discharged.  There was a general feeling of
disgust at the Cardinal’s conduct, and of commiseration towards the
porter for the loss of his place.  Affected at the misfortune of the
father of a family, I obtained his forgiveness; and since that time I
have often regretted the feeling which induced me to interfere.  The
notoriety of the discharge of the porter of Trianon, and the odium that
circumstance would have fixed upon the Cardinal, would have made the
Queen’s dislike to him still more publicly known, and would probably have
prevented the scandalous and notorious intrigue of the necklace.
The Queen, who was much prejudiced against the King of Sweden, received
him very coldly.
     [Gustavus III., King of Sweden, travelled in France under the title
     of Comte d’Haga.  Upon his accession to the throne, he managed the
     revolution which prostrated the authority of the Senate with equal
     skill, coolness, and courage.  He was assassinated in 1792, at a
     masked ball, by Auckarstrum.–NOTE BY THE EDITOR.]
All that was said of the private character of that sovereign, his
connection with the Comte de Vergennes, from the time of the Revolution
of Sweden, in 1772, the character of his favourite Armfeldt, and the
prejudices of the monarch himself against the Swedes who were well
received at the Court of Versailles, formed the grounds of this dislike.
He came one day uninvited and unexpected, and requested to dine with the
Queen.  The Queen received him in the little closet, and desired me to
send for her clerk of the kitchen, that she might be informed whether
there was a proper dinner to set before Comte d’Haga, and add to it if
necessary.  The King of Sweden assured her that there would be enough for
him; and I could not help smiling when I thought of the length of the
menu of the dinner of the King and Queen, not half of which would have
made its appearance had they dined in private.  The Queen looked
significantly at me, and I withdrew.  In the evening she asked me why I
had seemed so astonished when she ordered me to add to her dinner, saying
that I ought instantly to have seen that she was giving the King of
Sweden a lesson for his presumption.  I owned to her that the scene had
appeared to me so much in the bourgeois style, that I involuntarily
thought of the cutlets on the gridiron, and the omelette, which in
families in humble circumstances serve to piece out short commons.  She
was highly diverted with my answer, and repeated it to the King, who also
laughed heartily at it.
The peace with England satisfied all classes of society interested in the
national honour.  The departure of the English commissary from Dunkirk,
who had been fixed at that place ever since the shameful peace of 1763 as
inspector of our navy, occasioned an ecstasy of joy.
     [By the Treaty of Utrecht (1713) it was stipulated that the
     fortifications and port of Dunkirk should be destroyed.  By the
     Treaty of Paris (1763) a commissary was to reside at Dunkirk to see
     that no attempt was made to break this treaty.  This stipulation was
     revoked by the Peace of Versailles, in 1783.–see DYER’S “Modern
     Europe,” 1st edition, vol. i., pp.  205-438 and 539.]
The Government communicated to the Englishman the order for his departure
before the treaty was made public.  But for that precaution the populace
would have probably committed some excess or other, in order to make the
agent of English power feel the effects of the resentment which had
constantly increased during his stay at that port.  Those engaged in
trade were the only persons dissatisfied with the treaty of 1783.  That
article which provided for, the free admission of English goods
annihilated at one blow the trade of Rouen and the other manufacturing
towns throughout the kingdom.  The English swarmed into Paris.  A
considerable number of them were presented at Court.  The Queen paid them
marked attention; doubtless she wished them to distinguish between the
esteem she felt for their noble nation and the political views of the
Government in the support it had afforded to the Americans.  Discontent
was, however, manifested at Court in consequence of the favour bestowed
by the Queen on the English noblemen; these attentions were called
infatuations.  This was illiberal; and the Queen justly complained of
such absurd jealousy.
The journey to Fontainebleau and the winter at Paris and at Court were
extremely brilliant.  The spring brought back those amusements which the
Queen began to prefer to the splendour of fetes.  The most perfect
harmony subsisted between the King and Queen; I never saw but one cloud
between them.  It was soon dispelled, and the cause of it is perfectly
unknown to me.
My father-in-law, whose penetration and experience I respected greatly,
recommended me, when he saw me placed in the service of a young queen, to
shun all kinds of confidence.  “It procures,” said he, “but a very
fleeting, and at the same time dangerous sort of favour; serve with zeal
to the best of your judgment, but never do more than obey.  Instead of
setting your wits to work to discover why an order or a commission which
may appear of consequence is given to you, use them to prevent the
possibility of your knowing anything of the matter.”  I had occasion to
act on this wise advice.  One morning at Trianon I went into the Queen’s
chamber; there were letters lying upon the bed, and she was weeping
bitterly.  Her tears and sobs were occasionally interrupted by
exclamations of “Ah! that I were dead!–wretches! monsters! What have I
done to them?”  I offered her orange-flower water and ether.  “Leave me,"
said she, “if you love me; it would be better to kill me at once.”  At
this moment she threw her arm over my shoulder and began weeping afresh.
I saw that some weighty trouble oppressed her heart, and that she wanted
a confidant.  I suggested sending for the Duchesse de Polignac; this she
strongly opposed.  I renewed my arguments, and her opposition grew
weaker.  I disengaged myself from her arms, and ran to the antechamber,
where I knew that an outrider always waited, ready to mount and start at
a moment’s warning for Versailles.  I ordered him to go full speed, and
tell the Duchesse de Polignac that the Queen was very uneasy, and desired
to see her instantly.  The Duchess always had a carriage ready.  In less
than ten minutes she was at the Queen’s door.  I was the only person
there, having been forbidden to send for the other women.  Madame de
Polignac came in; the Queen held out her arms to her, the Duchess rushed
towards her.  I heard her sobs renewed and withdrew.
A quarter of an hour afterwards the Queen, who had become calmer, rang to
be dressed.  I sent her woman in; she put on her gown and retired to her
boudoir with the Duchess.  Very soon afterwards the Comte d’Artois
arrived from Compiegne, where he had been with the King.  He eagerly
inquired where the Queen was; remained half an hour with her and the
Duchess; and on coming out told me the Queen asked for me.  I found her
seated on the couch by the side of her friend; her features had resumed
their usual cheerful and gracious appearance.  She held out her hand to
me, and said to the Duchess, “I know I have made her so uncomfortable
this morning that I must set her poor heart at ease.”  She then added,
"You must have seen, on some fine summer’s day, a black cloud suddenly
appear and threaten to pour down upon the country and lay it waste.  The
lightest wind drives it away, and the blue sky and serene weather are
restored.  This is just the image of what has happened to me this
morning.”  She afterwards told me that the King would return from
Compiegne after hunting there, and sup with her; that I must send for her
purveyor, to select with him from his bills of fare all such dishes as
the King liked best; that she would have no others served up in the
evening at her table; and that this was a mark of attention that she
wished the King to notice.  The Duchesse de Polignac also took me by the
hand, and told me how happy she was that she had been with the Queen at a
moment when she stood in need of a friend.  I never knew what could have
created in the Queen so lively and so transient an alarm; but I guessed
from the particular care she took respecting the King that attempts had
been made to irritate him against her; that the malice of her enemies had
been promptly discovered and counteracted by the King’s penetration and
attachment; and that the Comte d’Artois had hastened to bring her
intelligence of it.
It was, I think, in the summer of 1787, during one of the Trianon
excursions, that the Queen of Naples–[Caroline, sister of Marie
Antoinette.]–sent the Chevalier de Bressac to her Majesty on a secret
mission relative to a projected marriage between the Hereditary Prince,
her son, and Madame, the King’s daughter; in the absence of the lady of
honour he addressed himself to me.  Although he said a great deal to me
about the close confidence with which the Queen of Naples honoured him,
and about his letter of credit, I thought he had the air of an
adventurer.–[He afterwards spent several years shut up in the Chateau de
l’Oeuf.]–He had, indeed, private letters for the Queen, and his
mission was not feigned; he talked to me very rashly even before his
admission, and entreated me to do all that lay in my power to dispose the
Queen’s mind in favour of his sovereign’s wishes; I declined, assuring
him that it did not become me to meddle with State affairs.
He endeavoured, but in vain, to prove to me that the union contemplated
by the Queen of Naples ought not to be looked upon in that light.
I procured M. de Bressac the audience he desired, but without suffering
myself even to seem acquainted with the object of his mission.  The Queen
told me what it was; she thought him a person ill-chosen for the
occasion; and yet she thought that the Queen, her sister, had done wisely
in not sending a man worthy to be avowed,–it being impossible that what
she solicited should take place.  I had an opportunity on this occasion,
as indeed on many others, of judging to what extent the Queen valued and
loved France and the dignity of our Court.  She then told me that Madame,
in marrying her cousin, the Duc d’Angouleme, would not lose her rank as
daughter of the Queen; and that her situation would be far preferable to
that of queen of any other country; and that there was nothing in Europe
to be compared to the Court of France; and that it would be necessary,
in order to avoid exposing a French Princess to feelings of deep regret,
in case she should be married to a foreign prince, to take her from the
palace of Versailles at seven years of age, and send her immediately to
the Court in which she was to dwell; and that at twelve would be too
late; for recollections and comparisons would ruin the happiness of all
the rest of her life.  The Queen looked upon the destiny of her sisters
as far beneath her own; and frequently mentioned the mortifications
inflicted by the Court of Spain upon her sister, the Queen of Naples, and
the necessity she was under of imploring the mediation of the King of
France.
She showed me several letters that she had received from the Queen of
Naples relative to her differences with the Court of Madrid respecting
the Minister Acton.  She thought him useful to her people, inasmuch as he
was a man of considerable information and great activity.  In these
letters she minutely acquainted her Majesty with the nature of the
affronts she had received, and represented Mr. Acton to her as a man whom
malevolence itself could not suppose capable of interesting her otherwise
than by his services.  She had had to suffer the impertinences of a
Spaniard named Las Casas, who had been sent to her by the King, her
father-in-law, to persuade her to dismiss Mr. Acton from the business of
the State, and from her intimacy.  She complained bitterly to the Queen,
her sister, of the insulting proceedings of this charge d’affaires, whom
she told, in order to convince him of the nature of the feelings which
attached her to Mr. Acton, that she would have portraits and busts of him
executed by the most eminent artists of Italy, and that she would then
send them to the King of Spain, to prove that nothing but the desire to
retain a man of superior capacity had induced her to bestow on him the
favour he enjoyed.  This Las Casas dared to answer her that it would be
useless trouble; that the ugliness of a man did not always render him
displeasing; and that the King of Spain had too much experience not to
know that there was no accounting for the caprices of a woman.
This audacious reply filled the Queen of Naples with indignation, and her
emotion caused her to miscarry on the same day.  In consequence of the
mediation of Louis XVI. the Queen of Naples obtained complete
satisfaction, and Mr. Acton continued Prime Minister.
Among the characteristics which denoted the goodness of the Queen, her
respect for personal liberty should have a place.  I have seen her put up
with the most troublesome importunities from people whose minds were
deranged rather than have them arrested.  Her patient kindness was put to
a very disagreeable trial by an ex-councillor of the Bordeaux Parliament,
named Castelnaux; this man declared himself the lover of the Queen, and
was generally known by that appellation.  For ten successive years did he
follow the Court in all its excursions.  Pale and wan, as people who are
out of their senses usually are, his sinister appearance occasioned the
most uncomfortable sensations.  During the two hours that the Queen’s
public card parties lasted, he would remain opposite her Majesty.  He
placed himself in the same manner before her at chapel, and never failed
to be at the King’s dinner or the dinner in public.  At the theatre he
invariably seated himself as near the Queen’s box as possible.  He always
set off for Fontainebleau or St. Cloud the day before the Court, and when
her Majesty arrived at her various residences, the first person she met
on getting out of her carriage was this melancholy madman, who never
spoke to any one.  When the Queen stayed at Petit Trianon the passion of
this unhappy man became still more annoying.  He would hastily swallow a
morsel at some eating-house, and spend all the rest of the day, even when
it rained, in going round and round the garden, always walking at the
edge of the moat.  The Queen frequently met him when she was either alone
or with her children; and yet she would not suffer any violence to be
used to relieve her from this intolerable annoyance.  Having one day
given M. de Seze permission to enter Trianon, she sent to desire he would
come to me, and directed me to inform that celebrated advocate of M. de
Castelnaux’s derangement, and then to send for him that M. de Seze might
have some conversation with him.  He talked to him nearly an hour, and
made considerable impression upon his mind; and at last M. de Castelnaux
requested me to inform the Queen positively that, since his presence was
disagreeable to her, he would retire to his province.  The Queen was very
much rejoiced, and desired me to express her full satisfaction to M. de
Seze.  Half an hour after M. de Seze was gone the unhappy madman was
announced.  He came to tell me that he withdrew his promise, that he had
not sufficient command of himself to give up seeing the Queen as often as
possible.  This new determination: was a disagreeable message to take to
her Majesty but how was I affected at hearing her say, “Well, let him
annoy me!  but do not let him be deprived of the blessing of freedom.”
     [On the arrest of the King and Queen at Varennes, this unfortunate
     Castelnaux attempted to starve himself to death.  The people in
     whose house he lived, becoming uneasy at his absence, had the door
     of his room forced open, when he was found stretched senseless on
     the floor.  I do not know what became of him after the 10th of
     August.–MADAME CAMPAN.]
The direct influence of the Queen on affairs during the earlier years
of the reign was shown only in her exertions to obtain from the King a
revision of the decrees in two celebrated causes.  It was contrary to her
principles to interfere in matters of justice, and never did she avail
herself of her influence to bias the tribunals.  The Duchesse de Praslin,
through a criminal caprice, carried her enmity to her husband so far as
to disinherit her children in favour of the family of M. de Guemenee.
The Duchesse de Choiseul, who, was warmly interested in this affair, one
day entreated the Queen, in my presence, at least to condescend to ask
the first president when the cause would be called on; the Queen replied
that she could not even do that, for it would manifest an interest which
it was her duty not to show.
If the King had not inspired the Queen with a lively feeling of love,
it is quite certain that she yielded him respect and affection for the
goodness of his disposition and the equity of which he gave so many
proofs throughout his reign.  One evening she returned very late; she
came out of the King’s closet, and said to M. de Misery and myself,
drying her eyes, which were filled with tears, “You see me weeping, but
do not be uneasy at it: these are the sweetest tears that a wife can
shed; they are caused by the impression which the justice and goodness of
the King have made upon me; he has just complied with my request for a
revision of the proceedings against Messieurs de Bellegarde and de
Monthieu, victims of the Duc d’Aiguillon’s hatred to the Duc de Choiseul.
He has been equally just to the Duc de Guines in his affair with Tort.
It is a happy thing for a queen to be able to admire and esteem him who
has admitted her to a participation of his throne; and as to you,
I congratulate you upon your having to live under the sceptre of so
virtuous a sovereign.”
The Queen laid before the King all the memorials of the Duc de Guines,
who, during his embassy to England, was involved in difficulties by a
secretary, who speculated in the public funds in London on his own
account, but in such a manner as to throw a suspicion of it on the
ambassador.  Messieurs de Vergennes and Turgot, bearing but little good-
will to the Duc de Guines, who was the friend of the Duc de Choiseul,
were not disposed to render the ambassador any service.  The Queen
succeeded in fixing the King’s particular attention on this affair, and
the innocence of the Duc de Guines triumphed through the equity of Louis
XVI.
An incessant underhand war was carried on between the friends and
partisans of M. de Choiseul, who were called the Austrians, and those who
sided with Messieurs d’Aiguillon, de Maurepas, and de Vergennes, who, for
the same reason, kept up the intrigues carried on at Court and in Paris
against the Queen.  Marie Antoinette, on her part, supported those who
had suffered in this political quarrel, and it was this feeling which led
her to ask for a revision of the proceedings against Messieurs de
Bellegarde and de Monthieu.  The first, a colonel and inspector of
artillery, and the second, proprietor of a foundry at St. Etienne, were,
under the Ministry of the Duc d’Aiguillon, condemned to imprisonment for
twenty years and a day for having withdrawn from the arsenals of France,
by order of the Duc de Choiseul, a vast number of muskets, as being of
no value except as old iron, while in point of fact the greater part of
those muskets were immediately embarked and sold to the Americans.  It
appears that the Duc de Choiseul imparted to the Queen, as grounds of
defence for the accused, the political views which led him to authorise
that reduction and sale in the manner in which it had been executed.  It
rendered the case of Messieurs de Bellegarde and de Monthieu more
unfavourable that the artillery officer who made the reduction in the
capacity of inspector was, through a clandestine marriage, brother-in-law
of the owner of the foundry, the purchaser of the rejected arms.  The
innocence of the two prisoners was, nevertheless, made apparent; and they
came to Versailles with their wives and children to throw themselves at
the feet of their benefactress.  This affecting scene took place in the
grand gallery, at the entrance to the Queen’s apartment.  She wished to
restrain the women from kneeling, saying that they had only had justice
done them; and that she ought to be congratulated upon the most
substantial happiness attendant upon her station, that of laying just
appeals before the King.
On every occasion, when the Queen had to speak in public, she used the
most appropriate and elegant language, notwithstanding the difficulty a
foreigner might be expected to experience.  She answered all addresses
herself, a custom which she learned at the Court of Maria Theresa.  The
Princesses of the House of Bourbon had long ceased to take the trouble of
speaking in such cases.  Madame Addlaide blamed the Queen for not doing
as they did, assuring her that it was quite sufficient to mutter a few
words that might sound like an answer, while the addressers, occupied
with what they had themselves been saying, would always take it for
granted that a proper answer had been returned.  The Queen saw that
idleness alone dictated such a proceeding, and that as the practice even
of muttering a few words showed the necessity of answering in some way,
it must be more proper to reply simply but clearly, and in the best style
possible.  Sometimes indeed, when apprised of the subject of the address,
she would write down her answer in the morning, not to learn it by heart,
but in order to settle the ideas or sentiments she wished to introduce.
The influence of the Comtesse de Polignac increased daily; and her
friends availed themselves of it to effect changes in the Ministry.
The dismissal of M. de Montbarrey, a man without talents or character,
was generally approved of.  It was rightly attributed to the Queen.  He
had been placed in administration by M. de Maurepas, and maintained by
his aged wife; both, of course, became more inveterate than ever against
the Queen and the Polignac circle.
The appointment of M. de Segur to the place of Minister of War, and of
M. de Castries to that of Minister of Marine, were wholly the work of
that circle.  The Queen dreaded making ministers; her favourite often
wept when the men of her circle compelled her to interfere.  Men blame
women for meddling in business, and yet in courts it is continually the
men themselves who make use of the influence of the women in matters with
which the latter ought to have nothing to do.
When M. de Segur was presented to the Queen on his new appointment, she
said to me, “You have just seen a minister of my making.  I am very glad,
so far as regards the King’s service, that he is appointed, for I think
the selection a very good one; but I almost regret the part I have taken
in it.  I take a responsibility upon myself.  I was fortunate in being
free from any; and in order to relieve myself from this as much as
possible I have just promised M. de Segur, and that upon my word of
honour, not to back any petition, nor to hinder any of his operations by
solicitations on behalf of my proteges.”
During the first administration of M. Necker, whose ambition had not then
drawn him into schemes repugnant to his better judgment, and whose views
appeared to the Queen to be very judicious, she indulged in hopes of the
restoration of the finances.  Knowing that M. de Maurepas wished to drive
M. Necker to resign, she urged him to have patience until the death of an
old man whom the King kept about him from a fondness for his first
choice, and out of respect for his advanced age.  She even went so far as
to tell him that M. de Maurepas was always ill, and that his end could
not be very distant.  M. Necker would not wait for that event.  The
Queen’s prediction was fulfilled.  M. de Maurepas ended his days
immediately after a journey to Fontainebleau in 1781.
M. Necker had retired.  He had been exasperated by a piece of treachery
in the old minister, for which he could not forgive him.  I knew
something of this intrigue at the time; it has since been fully explained
to me by Madame la Marechale de Beauvau.  M. Necker saw that his credit
at Court was declining, and fearing lest that circumstance should injure
his financial operations, he requested the King to grant him some favour
which might show the public that he had not lost the confidence of his
sovereign.  He concluded his letter by pointing out five requests–such
an office, or such a mark of distinction, or such a badge of honour, and
so on, and handed it to M. de Maurepas.  The or’s were changed into
and’s; and the King was displeased at M. Necker’s ambition, and the
assurance with which he displayed it.  Madame la Marechale de Beauvau
assured me that the Marechal de Castries saw the minute of M. Necker’s
letter, and that he likewise saw the altered copy.
The interest which the Queen took in M. Necker died away during his
retirement, and at last changed into strong prejudice against him.  He
wrote too much about the measures he would have pursued, and the benefits
that would have resulted to the State from them.  The ministers who
succeeded him thought their operations embarrassed by the care that M.
Necker and his partisans incessantly took to occupy the public with his
plans; his friends were too ardent.  The Queen discerned a party spirit
in these combinations, and sided wholly with his enemies.
After those inefficient comptrollers-general, Messieurs Joly de Fleury
and d’Ormesson, it became necessary to resort to a man of more
acknowledged talent, and the Queen’s friends, at that time combining with
the Comte d’Artois and with M. de Vergennes, got M. de Calonne appointed.
The Queen was highly displeased, and her close intimacy with the Duchesse
de Polignac began to suffer for this.
Her Majesty, continuing to converse with me upon the difficulties she
had met with in private life, told me that ambitious men without merit
sometimes found means to gain their ends by dint of importunity, and that
she had to blame herself for having procured M. d’Adhemar’s appointment
to the London embassy, merely because he teased her into it at the
Duchess’s house.  She added, however, that it was at a time of perfect
peace with the English; that the Ministry knew the inefficiency of
M. d’Adhemar as well as she did, and that he could do neither harm nor
good.
Often in conversations of unreserved frankness the Queen owned that she
had purchased rather dearly a piece of experience which would make her
carefully watch over the conduct of her daughters-in-law, and that she
would be particularly scrupulous about the qualifications of the ladies
who might attend them; that no consideration of rank or favour should
bias her in so important a choice.  She attributed several of her
youthful mistakes to a lady of great levity, whom she found in her palace
on her arrival in France.  She also determined to forbid the Princesses
coming under her control the practice of singing with professors, and
said, candidly, and with as much severity as her slanderers could have
done, “I ought to have heard Garat sing, and never to have sung duets
with him.”
The indiscreet zeal of Monsieur Augeard contributed to the public belief
that the Queen disposed of all the offices of finance.  He had, without
any authority for doing so, required the committee of fermiers-general to
inform him of all vacancies, assuring them that they would be meeting the
wishes of the Queen.  The members complied, but not without murmuring.
When the Queen became aware of what her secretary had done, she highly
disapproved of it, caused her resentment to be made known to the fermiers
-general, and abstained from asking for appointments,–making only one
request of the kind, as a marriage portion for one of her attendants, a
young woman of good family.
The Queen did not sufficiently conceal the dissatisfaction she felt at
having been unable to prevent the appointment of M. de Calonne; she even
one day went so far as to say at the Duchess’s, in the midst of the
partisans and protectors of that minister, that the finances of France
passed alternately from the hands of an honest man without talent into
those of a skilful knave.  M. de Calonne was thus far from acting in
concert with the Queen all the time that he continued in office; and,
while dull verses were circulated about Paris describing the Queen and
her favourite dipping at pleasure into the coffers of the comptroller-
general, the Queen was avoiding all communication with him.
During the long and severe winter of 1783-84 the King gave three millions
of livres for the relief of the indigent.  M. de Calonne, who felt the
necessity of making advances to the Queen, caught at this opportunity of
showing her respect and devotion.  He offered to place in her hands one
million of the three, to be distributed in her name and under her
direction.  His proposal was rejected; the Queen answered that the
charity ought to be wholly distributed in the King’s name, and that she
would this year debar herself of even the slightest enjoyments, in order
to contribute all her savings to the relief of the unfortunate.
The moment M. de Calonne left the closet the Queen sent for me:
"Congratulate me, my dear,” said she; “I have just escaped a snare,
or at least a matter which eventually might have caused me much regret."
She related the conversation which had taken place word for word to me,
adding, “That man will complete the ruin of the national finances.  It is
said that I placed him in his situation.  The people are made to believe
that I am extravagant; yet I have refused to suffer a sum of money from
the royal treasury, although destined for the most laudable purpose, even
to pass through my hands.”
The Queen, making monthly retrenchments from the expenditure of her privy
purse, and not having spent the gifts customary at the period of her
confinement, was in possession of from five to six hundred thousand
francs, her own savings.  She made use of from two to three hundred
thousand francs of this, which her first women sent to M. Lenoir, to the
cures of Paris and Versailles, and to the Soeurs Hospitalieres, and so
distributed them among families in need.
Desirous to implant in the breast of her daughter not only a desire to
succour the unfortunate, but those qualities necessary for the due
discharge of that duty, the Queen incessantly talked to her, though she
was yet very young, about the sufferings of the poor during a season so
inclement.  The Princess already had a sum of from eight to ten thousand
francs for charitable purposes, and the Queen made her distribute part of
it herself.
Wishing to give her children yet another lesson of beneficence,
she desired me on New Year’s eve to get from Paris, as in other years,
all the fashionable playthings, and have them spread out in her closet.
Then taking her children by the hand, she showed them all the dolls and
mechanical toys which were ranged there, and told them that she had
intended to give them some handsome New Year’s gifts, but that the cold
made the poor so wretched that all her money was spent in blankets and
clothes to protect them from the rigour of the season, and in supplying
them with bread; so that this year they would only have the pleasure of
looking at the new playthings.  When she returned with her children into
her sitting-room, she said there was still an unavoidable expense to be
incurred; that assuredly many mothers would at that season think as she
did,–that the toyman must lose by it; and therefore she gave him fifty
Louis to repay him for the cost of his journey, and console him for
having sold nothing.
The purchase of St. Cloud, a matter very simple in itself, had, on
account of the prevailing spirit, unfavourable consequences to the Queen.
The palace of Versailles, pulled to pieces in the interior by a variety
of new arrangements, and mutilated in point of uniformity by the removal
of the ambassadors’ staircase, and of the peristyle of columns placed at
the end of the marble court, was equally in want of substantial and
ornamental repair.  The King therefore desired M. Micque to lay before
him several plans for the repairs of the palace.  He consulted me on
certain arrangements analogous to some of those adopted in the Queen’s
establishment, and in my presence asked M. Micque how much money would be
wanted for the execution of the whole work, and how many years he would
be in completing it.  I forget how many millions were mentioned: M.
Micque replied that six years would be sufficient time if the Treasury
made the necessary periodical advances without any delay.  “And how many
years shall you require,” said the King, “if the advances are not
punctually made?"–"Ten, Sire,” replied the architect.  “We must then
reckon upon ten years,” said his Majesty, “and put off this great
undertaking until the year 1790; it will occupy the rest of the century.”
The King afterwards talked of the depreciation of property which took
place at Versailles whilst the Regent removed the Court of Louis XV. to
the Tuileries, and said that he must consider how to prevent that
inconvenience; it was the desire to do this that promoted the purchase of
St. Cloud.  The Queen first thought of it one day when she was riding out
with the Duchesse de Polignac and the Comtesse Diane; she mentioned it to
the King, who was much pleased with the thought,–the purchase confirming
him in the intention, which he had entertained for ten years, of quitting
Versailles.
The King determined that the ministers, public officers, pages, and a
considerable part of his stabling should remain at Versailles.  Messieurs
de Breteuil and de Calonne were instructed to treat with the Duc
d’Orleans for the purchase of St. Cloud; at first they hoped to be able
to conclude the business by a mere exchange.  The value of the Chateau de
Choisy, de la Muette, and a forest was equivalent to the sum demanded by
the House of Orleans; and in the exchange which the Queen expected she
only saw a saving to be made instead of an increase of expense.  By this
arrangement the government of Choisy, in the hands of the Duc de Coigny,
and that of La Muette, in the hands of the Marechal de Soubise, would be
suppressed.  At the same time the two concierges, and all the servants
employed in these two royal houses, would be reduced; but while the
treaty was going forward Messieurs de Breteuil and de Calonne gave up the
point of exchange, and some millions in cash were substituted for Choisy
and La Muette.
The Queen advised the King to give her St. Cloud, as a means of avoiding
the establishment of a governor; her plan being to have merely a
concierge there, by which means the governor’s expenses would be saved.
The King agreed, and St. Cloud was purchased for the Queen.  She provided
the same liveries for the porters at the gates and servants at the
chateau as for those at Trianon.  The concierge at the latter place had
put up some regulations for the household, headed, “By order of the
Queen.”  The same thing was done at St. Cloud.  The Queen’s livery at the
door of a palace where it was expected none but that of the King would be
seen, and the words “By order of the Queen” at the head of the printed
papers pasted near the iron gates, caused a great sensation, and produced
a very unfortunate effect, not only among the common people, but also.
among persons of a superior class.  They saw in it an attack upon the
customs of monarchy, and customs are nearly equal to laws.  The Queen
heard of this, but she thought that her dignity would be compromised if
she made any change in the form of these regulations, though they might
have been altogether superseded without inconvenience.  “My name is not
out of place,” said she, “in gardens belonging to myself; I may give
orders there without infringing on the rights of the State.”  This was
her only answer to the representations which a few faithful servants
ventured to make on the subject.  The discontent of the Parisians on this
occasion probably induced M. d’Espremenil, upon the first troubles about
the Parliament, to say that it was impolitic and immoral to see palaces
belonging to a Queen of France.
     [The Queen never forgot this affront of M. d’Espremenil’s; she said
     that as it was offered at a time when social order had not yet been
     disturbed, she had felt the severest mortification at it.  Shortly
     before the downfall of the throne M. Espremenil, having openly
     espoused the King’s side, was insulted in the gardens of the
     Tuileries by the Jacobins, and so ill-treated that he was carried
     home very ill.  Somebody recommended the Queen, on account of the
     royalist principles he then professed, to send and inquire for him.
     She replied that she was truly grieved at what had happened to M.
     d’Espremenil, but that mere policy should never induce her to show
     any particular solicitude about the man who had been the first to
     make so insulting an attack upon her character.–MADAME CAMPAN]
The Queen was very much dissatisfied with the manner in which M. de
Calonne had managed this matter.  The Abbe de Vermond, the most active
and persevering of that minister’s enemies, saw with delight that the
expedients of those from whom alone new resources might be expected were
gradually becoming exhausted, because the period when the Archbishop of
Toulouse would be placed over the finances was thereby hastened.
The royal navy had resumed an imposing attitude during the war for the
independence of America; glorious peace with England had compensated for
the former attacks of our enemies upon the fame of France; and the throne
was surrounded by numerous heirs.  The sole ground of uneasiness was in
the finances, but that uneasiness related only to the manner in which
they were administered.  In a word, France felt confident in its own
strength and resources, when two events, which seem scarcely worthy of a
place in history, but which have, nevertheless, an important one in that
of the French Revolution, introduced a spirit of ridicule and contempt,
not only against the highest ranks, but even against the most august
personages.  I allude to a comedy and a great swindling transaction.
Beaumarchais had long possessed a reputation in certain circles in Paris
for his wit and musical talents, and at the theatres for dramas more or
less indifferent, when his “Barbier de Seville” procured him a higher
position among dramatic writers.  His “Memoirs” against M. Goesman had
amused Paris by the ridicule they threw upon a Parliament which was
disliked; and his admission to an intimacy with M. de Maurepas procured
him a degree of influence over important affairs.  He then became
ambitious of influencing public opinion by a kind of drama, in which
established manners and customs should be held up to popular derision and
the ridicule of the new philosophers.  After several years of prosperity
the minds of the French had become more generally critical; and when
Beaumarchais had finished his monstrous but diverting “Mariage de
Figaro,” all people of any consequence were eager for the gratification
of hearing it read, the censors having decided that it should not be
performed.  These readings of “Figaro” grew so numerous that people were
daily heard to say, “I have been (or I am going to be) at the reading of
Beaumarchais’s play.”  The desire to see it performed became universal;
an expression that he had the art to use compelled, as it were, the
approbation of the nobility, or of persons in power, who aimed at ranking
among the magnanimous; he made his “Figaro” say that “none but little
minds dreaded little books.”  The Baron de Breteuil, and all the men of
Madame de Polignac’s circle, entered the lists as the warmest protectors
of the comedy.  Solicitations to the King became so pressing that his
Majesty determined to judge for himself of a work which so much engrossed
public attention, and desired me to ask M. Le Noir, lieutenant of police,
for the manuscript of the “Mariage de Figaro.”  One morning I received a
note from the Queen ordering me to be with her at three o’clock, and not
to come without having dined, for she should detain me some time.  When I
got to the Queen’s inner closet I found her alone with the King; a chair
and a small table were ready placed opposite to them, and upon the
table lay an enormous manuscript in several books.  The King said to me,
"There is Beaumarchais’s comedy; you must read it to us.  You will find
several parts troublesome on account of the erasures and references.  I
have already run it over, but I wish the Queen to be acquainted with the
work.  You will not mention this reading to any one.”
I began.  The King frequently interrupted me by praise or censure, which
was always just.  He frequently exclaimed, “That’s in bad taste; this man
continually brings the Italian concetti on the stage.”  At that soliloquy
of Figaro in which he attacks various points of government, and
especially at the tirade against State prisons, the King rose up and
said, indignantly:
“That’s detestable; that shall never be played; the Bastille must be
destroyed before the license to act this play can be any other than an
act of the most dangerous inconsistency.  This man scoffs at everything
that should be respected in a government.”
“It will not be played, then?”  said the Queen.
“No, certainly,” replied Louis XVI.; “you may rely upon that.”
Still it was constantly reported that “Figaro” was about to be performed;
there were even wagers laid upon the subject; I never should have laid
any myself, fancying that I was better informed as to the probability
than anybody else; if I had, however, I should have been completely
deceived.  The protectors of Beaumarchais, feeling certain that they
would succeed in their scheme of making his work public in spite of the
King’s prohibition, distributed the parts in the “Mariage de Figaro"
among the actors of the Theatre Francais.  Beaumarchais had made them
enter into the spirit of his characters, and they determined to enjoy at
least one performance of this so-called chef d’oeuvre.  The first
gentlemen of the chamber agreed that M. de la Ferte should lend the
theatre of the Hotel des Menus Plaisirs, at Paris, which was used for
rehearsals of the opera; tickets were distributed to a vast number of
leaders of society, and the day for the performance was fixed.  The King
heard of all this only on the very morning, and signed a ’lettre de
cachet,’–[A ’lettre de cachet’ was any written order proceeding from the
King.  The term was not confined merely to orders for arrest.]–which
prohibited the performance.  When the messenger who brought the order
arrived, he found a part of the theatre already filled with spectators,
and the streets leading to the Hotel des Menus Plaisirs filled with
carriages; the piece was not performed.  This prohibition of the King’s
was looked upon as an attack on public liberty.
The disappointment produced such discontent that the words oppression and
tyranny were uttered with no less passion and bitterness at that time
than during the days which immediately preceded the downfall of the
throne.  Beaumarchais was so far put off his guard by rage as to exclaim,
"Well, gentlemen, he won’t suffer it to be played here; but I swear it
shall be played,–perhaps in the very choir of Notre-Dame!”  There was
something prophetic in these words.  It was generally insinuated shortly
afterwards that Beaumarchais had determined to suppress all those parts
of his work which could be obnoxious to the Government; and on pretence
of judging of the sacrifices made by the author, M. de Vaudreuil obtained
permission to have this far-famed “Mariage de Figaro” performed at his
country house.  M. Campan was asked there; he had frequently heard the
work read, and did not now find the alterations that had been announced;
this he observed to several persons belonging to the Court, who
maintained that the author had made all the sacrifices required.  M.
Campan was so astonished at these persistent assertions of an obvious
falsehood that he replied by a quotation from Beaumarchais himself, and
assuming the tone of Basilio in the “Barbier de Seville,” he said,
"Faith, gentlemen, I don’t know who is deceived here; everybody is in the
secret.”  They then came to the point, and begged him to tell the Queen
positively that all which had been pronounced reprehensible in M. de
Beaumarchais’s play had been cut out.  My father-in-law contented himself
with replying that his situation at Court would not allow of his giving
an opinion unless the Queen should first speak of the piece to him.
The Queen said nothing to him about the matter.  Shortly, afterwards
permission to perform this play was at length obtained.  The Queen
thought the people of Paris would be finely tricked when they saw merely
an ill-conceived piece, devoid of interest, as it must appear when
deprived of its Satire.
     ["The King,” says Grimm, “made sure that the public would judge
     unfavourably of the work.”  He said to the Marquis de Montesquiou,
     who was going to see the first representation, ’Well, what do you
     augur of its success?’–’Sire, I hope the piece will fail.’–’And so
     do I,’ replied the King.
     “There is something still more ridiculous than my piece,” said
     Beaumarchais himself; “that is, its success.”  Mademoiselle Arnould
     foresaw it the first day, and exclaimed, “It is a production that
     will fail fifty nights successively.”  There was as crowded an
     audience on the seventy-second night as on the first.  The following
     is extracted from Grimm’s ’Correspondence.’
     “Answer of M. de Beaumarchais to ––-, who requested the use of his
     private box for some ladies desirous of seeing ’Figaro’ without
     being themselves seen.
     “I have no respect for women who indulge themselves in seeing any
     play which they think indecorous, provided they can do so in secret.
     I lend myself to no such acts.  I have given my piece to the public,
     to amuse, and not to instruct, not to give any compounding prudes
     the pleasure of going to admire it in a private box, and balancing
     their account with conscience by censuring it in company.  To
     indulge in the pleasure of vice and assume the credit of virtue is
     the hypocrisy of the age.  My piece is not of a doubtful nature; it
     must be patronised in good earnest, or avoided altogether;
     therefore, with all respect to you, I shall keep my box.”  This
     letter was circulated all over Paris for a week.]
Under the persuasion that there was not a passage left capable of
malicious or dangerous application, Monsieur attended the first
performance in a public box.  The mad enthusiasm of the public in favour
of the piece and Monsieur’s just displeasure are well known.  The author
was sent to prison soon afterwards, though his work was extolled to the
skies, and though the Court durst not suspend its performance.
The Queen testified her displeasure against all who had assisted the
author of the “Mariage de Figaro” to deceive the King into giving his
consent that it should be represented.  Her reproaches were more
particularly directed against M. de Vaudreuil for having had it performed
at his house.  The violent and domineering disposition of her favourite’s
friend at last became disagreeable to her.
One evening, on the Queen’s return from the Duchess’s, she desired her
’valet de chambre’ to bring her billiard cue into her closet, and ordered
me to open the box that contained it.  I took out the cue, broken in two.
It was of ivory, and formed of one single elephant’s tooth; the butt was
of gold and very tastefully wrought.  “There,” said she, “that is the way
M. de Vaudreuil has treated a thing I valued highly.  I had laid it upon
the couch while I was talking to the Duchess in the salon; he had the
assurance to make use of it, and in a fit of passion about a blocked
ball, he struck the cue so violently against the table that he broke it
in two.  The noise brought me back into the billiard-room; I did not say
a word to him, but my looks showed him how angry I was.  He is the more
provoked at the accident, as he aspires to the post of Governor to the
Dauphin.  I never thought of him for the place.  It is quite enough to
have consulted my heart only in the choice of a governess; and I will not
suffer that of a Governor to the Dauphin to be at all affected by the
influence of my friends.  I should be responsible for it to the nation.
The poor man does not know that my determination is taken; for I have
never expressed it to the Duchess.  Therefore, judge of the sort of an
evening he must have passed!”
Shortly after the public mind had been thrown into agitation by the
performance of the “Mariage de Figaro,” an obscure plot, contrived by
swindlers, and matured in a corrupted society, attacked the Queen’s
character in a vital point and assailed the majesty of the throne.
I am about to speak of the notorious affair of the necklace purchased, as
it was said, for the Queen by Cardinal de Rohan.  I will narrate all that
has come to my knowledge relating to this business; the most minute
particulars will prove how little reason the Queen had to apprehend the
blow by which she was threatened, and which must be attributed to a
fatality that human prudence could not have foreseen, but from which, to
say the truth, she might have extricated herself with more skill.
I have already said that in 1774 the Queen purchased jewels of Boehmer to
the value of three hundred and sixty thousand franca, that she paid for
them herself out of her own private funds, and that it required several
years to enable her to complete the payment.  The King afterwards
presented her with a set of rubies and diamonds of a fine water, and
subsequently with a pair of bracelets worth two hundred thousand francs.
The Queen, after having her diamonds reset in new patterns, told Boehmer
that she found her jewel case rich enough, and was not desirous of making
any addition to it.
     [Except on those days when the assemblies at Court were particularly
     attended, such as the 1st of January and the 2d of February, devoted
     to the procession of the Order of the Holy Ghost, and on the
     festivals of Easter, Whitsuntide, and Christmas, the Queen no longer
     wore any dresses but muslin or white Florentine taffety.  Her head-
     dress was merely a hat; the plainest were preferred; and her
     diamonds never quitted their caskets but for the dresses of
     ceremony, confined to the days I have mentioned.  Before the Queen
     was five and twenty she began to apprehend that she might be induced
     to make too frequent use of flowers and of ornaments, which at that
     time were exclusively reserved for youth.  Madame Bertin having
     brought a wreath for the head and neck, composed of roses, the Queen
     feared that the brightness of the flowers might be disadvantageous
     to her complexion.  She was unquestionably too severe upon herself,
     her beauty having as yet experienced no alteration; it is easy to
     conceive the concert of praise and compliment that replied to the
     doubt she had expressed.  The Queen, approaching me, said, “I charge
     you, from this day, to give me notice when flowers shall cease to
     become me."–"I shall do no such thing,” I replied, immediately;
     “I have not read ’Gil Bias’ without profiting in some degree from
     it, and I find your Majesty’s order too much like that given him by
     the Archbishop of Granada, to warn him of the moment when he should
     begin to fall off in the composition of his homilies."–"Go,” said
     the Queen; “You are less sincere than Gil Blas; and I world have
     been more amenable than the Archbishop."–MADAME CAMPAN.]
Still, this jeweller busied himself for some years in forming a
collection of the finest diamonds circulating in the trade, in order to
compose a necklace of several rows, which he hoped to induce her Majesty
to purchase; he brought it to M. Campan, requesting him to mention it to
the Queen, that she might ask to see it, and thus be induced to wish to
possess it.  This M. Campan refused to do, telling him that he should be
stepping out of the line of his duty were he to propose to the Queen an
expense of sixteen hundred thousand francs, and that he believed neither
the lady of honour nor the tirewoman would take upon herself to execute
such a commission.  Boehmer persuaded the King’s first gentleman for the
year to show this superb necklace to his Majesty, who admired it so much
that he himself wished to see the Queen adorned with it, and sent the
case to her; but she assured him she should much regret incurring so
great an expense for such an article, that she had already very beautiful
diamonds, that jewels of that description were now worn at Court not more
than four or five times a year, that the necklace must be returned, and
that the money would be much better employed in building a man-of-war.
     [Messieurs Boehmer and Bassange, jewellers to the Crown, were
     proprietors of a superb diamond necklace, which had, as it was said,
     been intended for the Comtesse du Barry.  Being under the necessity
     of selling it, they offered it, during the last war, to the king and
     Queen; but their Majesties made the following prudent answer: “We
     stand more in need of ships than of jewels."–"Secret Correspondence
     of the Court of Louis XVI."]
Boehmer, in sad tribulation at finding his expectations delusive,
endeavoured for some time, it is said, to dispose of his necklace among
the various Courts of Europe.
A year after his fruitless attempts, Boehmer again caused his diamond
necklace to be offered to the King, proposing that it should be paid for
partly by instalments, and partly in life annuities; this proposal was
represented as highly advantageous, and the King, in my presence,
mentioned the matter once more to the Queen.  I remember the Queen told
him that, if the bargain really was not bad, he might make it, and keep
the necklace until the marriage of one of his children; but that, for her
part, she would never wear it, being unwilling that the world should have
to reproach her with having coveted so expensive an article.  The King
replied that their children were too young to justify such an expense,
which would be greatly increased by the number of years the diamonds
would remain useless, and that he would finally decline the offer.
Boehmer complained to everybody of his misfortune, and all reasonable
people blamed him for having collected diamonds to so considerable an
amount without any positive order for them.  This man had purchased the
office of jeweller to the Crown, which gave him some rights of entry at
Court.  After several months spent in ineffectual attempts to carry his
point, and in idle complaints, he obtained an audience of the Queen, who
had with her the young Princess, her daughter; her Majesty did not know
for what purpose Boehmer sought this audience, and had not the slightest
idea that it was to speak to her again about an article twice refused by
herself and the King.
Boehmer threw himself upon his knees, clasped his hands, burst into
tears, and exclaimed, “Madame, I am ruined and disgraced if you do not
purchase my necklace.  I cannot outlive so many misfortunes.  When I go
hence I shall throw myself into the river.”
“Rise, Boehmer,” said the Queen, in a tone sufficiently severe to recall
him to himself; “I do not like these rhapsodies; honest men have no
occasion to fall on their knees to make their requests.  If you were to
destroy yourself I should regret you as a madman in whom I had taken an
interest, but I should not be in any way responsible for that misfortune.
Not only have I never ordered the article which causes your present
despair, but whenever you have talked to me about fine collections of
jewels I have told you that I should not add four diamonds to those which
I already possessed.  I told you myself that I declined taking the
necklace; the King wished to give it to me, but I refused him also; never
mention it to me again.  Divide it and try to sell it piecemeal, and do
not drown yourself.  I am very angry with you for acting this scene of
despair in my presence and before this child.  Let me never see you
behave thus again.  Go.”  Baehmer withdrew, overwhelmed with confusion,
and nothing further was then heard of him.
When Madame Sophie was born the Queen told me M. de Saint-James, a rich
financier, had apprised her that Boehmer was still intent upon the sale
of his necklace, and that she ought, for her own satisfaction, to
endeavour to learn what the man had done with it; she desired me the
first time I should meet him to speak to him about it, as if from the
interest I took in his welfare.  I spoke to him about his necklace, and
he told me he had been very fortunate, having sold it at Constantinople
for the favourite sultana.  I communicated this answer to the Queen, who
was delighted with it, but could not comprehend how the Sultan came to
purchase his diamonds in Paris.
The Queen long avoided seeing Boehmer, being fearful of his rash
character; and her valet de chambre, who had the care of her jewels, made
the necessary repairs to her ornaments unassisted.  On the baptism of the
Duc d’Angouleme, in 1785, the King gave him a diamond epaulet and
buckles, and directed Baehmer to deliver them to the Queen.  Boehmer
presented them on her return from mass, and at the same time gave into
her hands a letter in the form of a petition.  In this paper he told the
Queen that he was happy to see her “in possession of the finest diamonds
known in Europe,” and entreated her not to forget him.  The Queen read
Boehmer’s address to her aloud, and saw nothing in it but a proof of
mental aberration; she lighted the paper at a wax taper standing near
her, as she had some letters to seal, saying, “It is not worth keeping."
She afterwards much regretted the loss of this enigmatical memorial.
After having burnt the paper, her Majesty said to me, “That man is born
to be my torment; he has always some mad scheme in his head; remember,
the first time you see him, to tell him that I do not like diamonds now,
and that I will buy no more so long as I live; that if I had any money to
spare I would rather add to my property at St. Cloud by the purchase of
the land surrounding it; now, mind you enter into all these particulars
and impress them well upon him.”  I asked her whether she wished me to
send for him; she replied in the negative, adding that it would be
sufficient to avail myself of the first opportunity afforded by meeting
him; and that the slightest advance towards such a man would be
misplaced.
On the 1st of August I left Versailles for my country house at Crespy; on
the 3d came Boehmer, extremely uneasy at not having received any answer
from the Queen, to ask me whether I had any commission from her to him; I
replied that she had entrusted me with none; that she had no commands for
him, and I faithfully repeated all she had desired me to say to him.
“But,” said Boehmer, “the answer to the letter I presented to her,–to
whom must I apply for that?”
“To nobody,” answered I; “her Majesty burnt your memorial without even
comprehending its meaning.”
“Ah! madame,” exclaimed he, “that is impossible; the Queen knows that she
has money to pay me!”
“Money, M. Boehmer?  Your last accounts against the Queen were discharged
long ago.”
“Madame, you are not in the secret.  A man who is ruined for want of
payment of fifteen hundred thousand francs cannot be said to be
satisfied.”
“Have you lost your senses?” said I.  “For what can the Queen owe you so
extravagant a sum?”
“For my necklace, madame,” replied Boehmer, coolly.
“What!” I exclaimed, “that necklace again, which you have teased the
Queen about so many years!  Did you not tell me you had sold it at
Constantinople?”
“The Queen desired me to give that answer to all who should speak to me
on the subject,” said the wretched dupe.  He then told me that the Queen
wished to have the necklace, and had had it purchased for her by
Monseigneur, the Cardinal de Rohan.
“You are deceived,” I exclaimed; “the Queen has not once spoken to the
Cardinal since his return from Vienna; there is not a man at her Court
less favourably looked upon.”
“You are deceived yourself, madame,” said Boehmer; “she sees him so much
in private that it was to his Eminence she gave thirty thousand francs,
which were paid me as an instalment; she took them, in his presence, out
of the little secretaire of Sevres porcelain next the fireplace in her
boudoir.”
“And the Cardinal told you all this?”
“Yes, madame, himself.”
“What a detestable plot!”  cried I.
“Indeed, to say the truth, madame, I begin to be much alarmed, for his
Eminence assured me that the Queen would wear the necklace on Whit-
Sunday, but I did not see it upon her, and it was that which induced me
to write to her Majesty.”
He then asked me what he ought to do.  I advised him to go on to
Versailles, instead of returning to Paris, whence he had just arrived;
to obtain an immediate audience from the Baron de Breteuil, who, as head
of the King’s household, was the minister of the department to which
Boehmer belonged, and to be circumspect; and I added that he appeared to
me extremely culpable,–not as a diamond merchant, but because being a
sworn officer it was unpardonable of him to have acted without the direct
orders of the King, the Queen, or the Minister.  He answered, that he had
not acted without direct orders; that he had in his possession all the
notes signed by the Queen, and that he had even been obliged to show them
to several bankers in order to induce them to extend the time for his
payments.  I urged his departure for Versailles, and he assured me he
would go there immediately.  Instead of following my advice, he went to
the Cardinal, and it was of this visit of Boehmer’s that his Eminence
made a memorandum, found in a drawer overlooked by the Abbe Georgel when
he burnt, by order of the Cardinal, all the papers which the latter had
at Paris.  The memorandum was thus worded: “On this day, 3d August,
Boehmer went to Madame Campan’s country house, and she told him that the
Queen had never had his necklace, and that he had been deceived.”
When Boehmer was gone, I wanted to follow him, and go to the Queen; my
father-in-law prevented me, and ordered me to leave the minister to
elucidate such an important affair, observing that it was an infernal
plot; that I had given Boehmer the best advice, and had nothing more to
do with the business.  Boehmer never said one word to me about the woman
De Lamotte, and her name was mentioned for the first time by the Cardinal
in his answers to the interrogatories put to him before the King.  After
seeing the Cardinal, Boehmer went to Trianon, and sent a message to the
Queen, purporting that I had advised him to come and speak to her.  His
very words were repeated to her Majesty, who said, “He is mad; I have
nothing to say to him, and will not see him.”  Two or three days
afterwards the Queen sent for me to Petit Trianon, to rehearse with me
the part of Rosina, which she was to perform in the “Barbier de Seville."
I was alone with her, sitting upon her couch; no mention was made of
anything but the part.  After we had spent an hour in the rehearsal, her
Majesty asked me why I had sent Boehmer to her; saying he had been in my
name to speak to her, and that she would not see him.  It was in this
manner I learnt that he had not followed my advice in the slightest
degree.  The change of my countenance, when I heard the man’s name, was
very perceptible; the Queen perceived it, and questioned me.  I entreated
her to see him, and assured her it was of the utmost importance for her
peace of mind; that there was a plot going on, of which she was not
aware; and that it was a serious one, since engagements signed by herself
were shown about to people who had lent Boehmer money.  Her surprise and
vexation were great.  She desired me to remain at Trianon, and sent off a
courier to Paris, ordering Boehmer to come to her upon some pretext which
has escaped my recollection.  He came next morning; in fact it was the
day on which the play was performed, and that was the last amusement the
Queen allowed herself at that retreat.
The Queen made him enter her closet, and asked him by what fatality it
was that she was still doomed to hear of his foolish pretence of selling
her an article which she had steadily refused for several years.  He
replied that he was compelled, being unable to pacify his creditors any
longer.  “What are your creditors to me?”  said her Majesty.  Boehmer
then regularly related to her all that he had been made to believe had
passed between the Queen and himself through the intervention of the
Cardinal.  She was equally incensed and surprised at each thing she
heard.  In vain did she speak; the jeweller, equally importunate and
dangerous, repeated incessantly, “Madame, there is no longer time for
feigning; condescend to confess that you have my necklace, and let some
assistance be given to me, or my bankruptcy will soon bring the whole to
light.”
It is easy to imagine how the Queen must have suffered.  On Boehmer’s
going away, I found her in an alarming condition; the idea that any one
could have believed that such a man as the Cardinal possessed her full
confidence; that she should have employed him to deal with a tradesman
without the King’s knowledge, for a thing which she had refused to accept
from the King himself, drove her to desperation.  She sent first for the
Abbe de Vermond, and then for the Baron de Breteuil.  Their hatred and
contempt for the Cardinal made them too easily forget that the lowest
faults do not prevent the higher orders of the empire from being defended
by those to whom they have the honour to belong; that a Rohan, a Prince
of the Church, however culpable he might be, would be sure to have a
considerable party which would naturally be joined by all the
discontented persons of the Court, and all the frondeurs of Paris.
They too easily believed that he would be stripped of all the advantages
of his rank and order, and given up to the disgrace due to his irregular
conduct; they deceived themselves.
I saw the Queen after the departure of the Baron and the Abbe; her
agitation made me shudder.  “Fraud must be unmasked,” said she; “when the
Roman purple and the title of Prince cover a mere money-seeker, a cheat
who dares to compromise the wife of his sovereign, France and all Europe
should know it.”  It is evident that from that moment the fatal plan was
decided on.  The Queen perceived my alarm; I did not conceal it from her.
I knew too well that she had many enemies not to be apprehensive on
seeing her attract the attention of the whole world to an intrigue that
they would try to complicate still more.  I entreated her to seek the
most prudent and moderate advice.  She silenced me by desiring me to make
myself easy, and to rest satisfied that no imprudence would be committed.
On the following Sunday, the 15th of August, being the Assumption, at
twelve o’clock, at the very moment when the Cardinal, dressed in his
pontifical garments, was about to proceed to the chapel, he was sent for
into the King’s closet, where the Queen then was.
The King said to him, “You have purchased diamonds of Boehmer?”
“Yes, Sire.”
“What have you done with them?”
“I thought they had been delivered to the Queen.”
“Who commissioned you?”
“A lady, called the Comtesse de Lamotte-Valois, who handed me a letter
from the Queen; and I thought I was gratifying her Majesty by taking this
business on myself.”
The Queen here interrupted him and said, “How, monsieur, could you
believe that I should select you, to whom I have not spoken for eight
years, to negotiate anything for me, and especially through the mediation
of a woman whom I do not even know?”
“I see plainly,” said the Cardinal, “that I have been duped.  I will pay
for the necklace; my desire to please your Majesty blinded me; I
suspected no trick in the affair, and I am sorry for it.”
He then took out of his pocket-book a letter from the Queen to Madame de
Lamotte, giving him this commission.  The King took it, and, holding it
towards the Cardinal, said:
“This is neither written nor signed by the Queen.  How could a Prince of
the House of Rohan, and a Grand Almoner of France, ever think that the
Queen would sign Marie Antoinette de France?  Everybody knows that queens
sign only by their baptismal names.  But, monsieur,” pursued the King,
handing him a copy of his letter to Baehmer, “have you ever written such
a letter as this?”
Having glanced over it, the Cardinal said, “I do not remember having
written it.”
“But what if the original, signed by yourself, were shown to you?”
“If the letter be signed by myself it is genuine.”
He was extremely confused, and repeated several times, “I have been
deceived, Sire; I will pay for the necklace.  I ask pardon of your
Majesties.”
“Then explain to me,” resumed the King, “the whole of this enigma.  I do
not wish to find you guilty; I had rather you would justify yourself.
Account for all the manoeuvres with Baehmer, these assurances and these
letters.”
The Cardinal then, turning pale, and leaning against the table, said,
"Sire, I am too much confused to answer your Majesty in a way–”
“Compose yourself, Cardinal, and go into my cabinet; you will there find
paper, pens, and ink,–write what you have to say to me.”
The Cardinal went into the King’s cabinet, and returned a quarter of an
hour afterwards with a document as confused as his verbal answers had
been.  The King then said, “Withdraw, monsieur.”  The Cardinal left the
King’s chamber, with the Baron de Breteuil, who gave him in custody to a
lieutenant of the Body Guard, with orders to take him to his apartment.
M. d’Agoult, aide-major of the Body Guard, afterwards took him into
custody, and conducted him to his hotel, and thence to the Bastille.  But
while the Cardinal had with him only the young lieutenant of the Body
Guard, who was much embarrassed at having such an order to execute, his
Eminence met his heyduc at the door of the Salon of Hercules; he spoke to
him in German and then asked the lieutenant if he could lend him a
pencil; the officer gave him that which he carried about him, and the
Cardinal wrote to the Abbe Georgel, his grand vicar and friend, instantly
to burn all Madame de Lamotte’s correspondence, and all his other
letters.
     [The Abbe Georgel thus relates the circumstance: The Cardinal, at
     that trying moment, gave an astonishing proof of his presence of
     mind; notwithstanding the escort which surrounded him, favoured by
     the attendant crowd, he stopped, and stooping down with his face
     towards the wall, as if to fasten his buckle, snatched out his
     pencil and hastily wrote a few words upon a scrap of paper placed
     under his hand in his square red cap.  He rose again and proceeded.
     on entering his house, his people formed a lane; he slipped this
     paper, unperceived, into the hand of a confidential valet de
     chambre, who waited for him at the door of his apartment.”  This
     story is scarcely credible; it is not at the moment of a prisoner’s
     arrest, when an inquisitive crowd surrounds and watches him, that he
     can stop and write secret messages.  However, the valet de chambre
     posts off to Paris.  He arrives at the palace of the Cardinal
     between twelve and one o’clock; and his horse falls dead in the
     stable.  “I was in my apartment,” said the Abbe Georgel, “the valet
     de chambre entered wildly, with a deadly paleness on his
     countenance, and exclaimed, ’All is lost; the Prince is arrested.’
     He instantly fell, fainting, and dropped the note of which he was
     the bearer.”  The portfolio containing the papers which might
     compromise the Cardinal was immediately placed beyond the reach of
     all search.  Madame de Lamotte also was foolishly allowed sufficient
     time after she heard of the arrest of the Cardinal to burn all the
     letters she had received from him.  Assisted by Beugnot, she
     completed this at three the same morning that she was: arrested at
     four.–See “Memoirs of Comte de Beugnot,” vol i., p. 74.]
This commission was executed before M. de Crosne, lieutenant of police,
had received an order from the Baron de Breteuil to put seals upon the
Cardinal’s papers.  The destruction of all his Eminence’s correspondence,
and particularly that with Madame de Lamotte, threw an impenetrable cloud
over the whole affair.
From that moment all proofs of this intrigue disappeared.  Madame de
Lamotte was apprehended at Bar-sur-Aube; her husband had already gone to
England.  From the beginning of this fatal affair all the proceedings of
the Court appear to have been prompted by imprudence and want of
foresight; the obscurity resulting left free scope for the fables of
which the voluminous memorials written on one side and the other
consisted.  The Queen so little imagined what could have given rise to
the intrigue, of which she was about to become the victim, that, at the
moment when the King was interrogating the Cardinal, a terrific idea
entered her mind.  With that rapidity of thought caused by personal
interest and extreme agitation, she fancied that, if a design to ruin her
in the eyes of the King and the French people were the concealed motive
of this intrigue, the Cardinal would, perhaps, affirm that she had the
necklace; that he had been honoured with her confidence for this
purchase, made without the King’s knowledge; and point out some secret
place in her apartment, where he might have got some villain to hide it.
Want of money and the meanest swindling were the sole motives for this
criminal affair.  The necklace had already been taken to pieces and sold,
partly in London, partly in Holland, and the rest in Paris.
The moment the Cardinal’s arrest was known a universal clamour arose.
Every memorial that appeared during the trial increased the outcry.
On this occasion the clergy took that course which a little wisdom and
the least knowledge of the spirit of such a body ought to have foreseen.
The Rohans and the House of Conde, as well as the clergy, made their
complaints heard everywhere.  The King consented to having a legal
judgment, and early in September he addressed letters-patent to the
Parliament, in which he said that he was “filled with the most just
indignation on seeing the means which, by the confession of his Eminence
the Cardinal, had been employed in order to inculpate his most dear
spouse and companion.”
Fatal moment!  in which the Queen found herself, in consequence of this
highly impolitic step, on trial with a subject, who ought to have been
dealt with by the power of the King alone.  The Princes and Princesses of
the House of Conde, and of the Houses of Rohan, Soubise, and Guemenee,
put on mourning, and were seen ranged in the way of the members of the
Grand Chamber to salute them as they proceeded to the palace, on the days
of the Cardinal’s trial; and Princes of the blood openly canvassed
against the Queen of France.
The Pope wished to claim, on behalf of the Cardinal de Rohan, the right
belonging to his ecclesiastical rank, and demanded that he should be
judged at Rome.  The Cardinal de Bernis, ambassador from France to his
Holiness, formerly Minister for Foreign Affairs, blending the wisdom of
an old diplomatist with the principles of a Prince of the Church, wished
that this scandalous affair should be hushed up.  The King’s aunts, who
were on very intimate terms with the ambassador, adopted his opinion, and
the conduct of the King and Queen was equally and loudly censured in the
apartments of Versailles and in the hotels and coffee-houses of Paris.
Madame, the King’s sister-in-law, had been the sole protectress of De
Lamotte, and had confined her patronage to granting her a pension of
twelve to fifteen hundred francs.  Her brother was in the navy, but the
Marquis de Chabert, to whom he had been recommended, could never train a
good officer.  The Queen in vain endeavoured to call to mind the features
of this person, of whom she had often heard as an intriguing woman, who
came frequently on Sundays to the gallery of Versailles.  At the time
when all France was engrossed by the persecution against the Cardinal,
the portrait of the Comtesse de Lamotte  Valois was publicly sold.  Her
Majesty desired me one day, when I was going to Paris, to buy her the
engraving, which was said to be a tolerable likeness, that she might
ascertain whether she could recognise in it any person whom she might
have seen in the gallery.
     [The public, with the exception of the lowest class, were admitted
     into the gallery and larger apartments of Versailles, as they were
     into the park.–MADAME CAMPAN.]
The woman De Lamotte’s father was a peasant at Auteuil, though he called
himself Valois.  Madame de Boulainvilliers once saw from her terrace two
pretty little peasant girls, each labouring under a heavy bundle of
sticks.  The priest of the village, who was walking with her, told her
that the children possessed some curious papers, and that he had no doubt
they were descendants of a Valois, an illegitimate son of one of the
princes of that name.
The family of Valois had long ceased to appear in the world.  Hereditary
vices had gradually plunged them into the deepest misery.  I have heard
that the last Valois then known occupied the estate called Gros Bois;
that as he seldom came to Court, Louis XIII. asked him what he was about
that he remained so constantly in the country; and that this M. de Valois
merely answered, “Sire, I only do there what I ought.”  It was shortly
afterwards discovered that he was coining.
Neither the Queen herself nor any one near her ever had the slightest
connection with the woman De Lamotte; and during her prosecution she
could point out but one of the Queen’s servants, named Desclos, a valet
of the Queen’s bedchamber, to whom she pre tended she had delivered
Boehmer’s necklace.  This Desclos was a very honest man; upon being
confronted with the woman De Lamotte, it was proved that she had never
seen him but once, which was at the house of the wife of a surgeon-
accoucheur at Versailles, the only person she visited at Court; and that
she had not given him the necklace.  Madame de Lamotte married a private
in Monsieur’s body-guard; she lodged at Versailles at the Belle Image, a
very inferior furnished house; and it is inconceivable how so obscure a
person could succeed in making herself believed to be a friend of the
Queen, who, though so extremely affable, seldom granted audiences, and
only to titled persons.
The trial of the Cardinal is too generally known to require me to repeat
its details here.  The point most embarrassing to him was the interview
he had in February, 1785, with M. de Saint-James, to whom he confided the
particulars of the Queen’s pretended commission, and showed the contract
approved and signed Marie Antoinette de France.  The memorandum found in
a drawer of the Cardinal’s bureau, in which he had himself written what
Baehmer told him after having seen me at my country house, was likewise
an unfortunate document for his Eminence.
I offered to the King to go and declare that Baehmer had told me that the
Cardinal assured him he had received from the Queen’s own hand the thirty
thousand francs given on account upon the bargain being concluded, and
that his Eminence had seen her Majesty take that sum in bills from the
porcelain secretaire in her boudoir.  The King declined my offer, and
said to me, “Were you alone when Boehmer told you this?”  I answered that
I was alone with him in my garden.  “Well,” resumed he, “the man would
deny the fact; he is now sure of being paid his sixteen hundred thousand
francs, which the Cardinal’s family will find it necessary to make good
to him; we can no longer rely upon his sincerity; it would look as if you
were sent by the Queen, and that would not be proper.”
     [The guilty woman no sooner knew that all was about to be discovered
     than she sent for the jewellers, and told them the Cardinal had
     perceived that the agreement, which he believed to have been signed
     by the Queen, was a false and forged document.  “However,” added
     she, “the Cardinal possesses a considerable fortune, and he can very
     well pay you.”  These words reveal the whole secret.  The Countess
     had taken the necklace to herself, and flattered herself that M. de
     Rohan, seeing himself deceived and cruelly imposed upon, would
     determine to pay and make the beat terms he could, rather than
     suffer a matter of this nature to become public.-"Secret
     Correspondence of the Court of Louis XVI."]
The procureur general’s information was severe on the Cardinal.  The
Houses of Conde and Rohan and the majority of the nobility saw in this
affair only an attack on the Prince’s rank, the clergy only a blow aimed
at the privileges of a cardinal.  The clergy demanded that the
unfortunate business of the Prince Cardinal de Rohan should be submitted
to ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and the Archbishop of Narbonne, then
President of the Convocation, made representations upon the subject to
the King; the bishops wrote to his Majesty to remind him that a private
ecclesiastic implicated in the affair then pending would have a right to
claim his constitutional judges, and that this right was refused to a
cardinal, his superior in the hierarchical order.  In short, the clergy
and the greater part of the nobility were at that time outrageous against
authority, and chiefly against the Queen.
The procureur-general’s conclusions, and those of a part of the heads of
the magistracy, were as severe towards the Cardinal as the information
had been; yet he was fully acquitted by a majority of three voices; the
woman De Lamotte was condemned to be whipped, branded, and imprisoned;
and her husband, for contumacy, was condemned to the galleys for life.
     [The following extract is from the “Memoirs” of the Abbe Georgel:
     “The sittings were long and multiplied; it was necessary to read the
     whole proceedings; more than fifty judges sat; a master of requests;
     a friend of the Prince, wrote down all that was said there, and sent
     it to his advisers, who found means to inform the Cardinal of it,
     and to add the plan of conduct he ought to pursue.”  D’Epremesnil,
     and other young counsellors, showed upon that occasion but too much
     audacity in braving the Court, too much eagerness in seizing an
     opportunity of attacking it.  They were the first to shake that
     authority which their functions made it a duty in them to respect.-
     NOTE BY THE EDITOR.]
M. Pierre de Laurencel, the procureur general’s substitute, sent the
Queen a list of the names of the members of the Grand Chamber, with the
means made use of by the friends of the Cardinal to gain their votes
during the trial.  I had this list to keep among the papers which the
Queen deposited in the house of M. Campan, my father-in-law, and which,
at his death, she ordered me to preserve.  I burnt this statement, but I
remember ladies performed a part not very creditable to their principles;
it was by them, in consideration of large sums which they received, that
some of the oldest and most respected members were won over.  I did not
see a single name amongst the whole Parliament that was gained directly.
The belief confirmed by time is, that the Cardinal was completely duped
by the woman De Lamotte and Cagliostro.  The King may have been in error
in thinking him an accomplice in this miserable and criminal scheme, but
I have faithfully repeated his Majesty’s judgment about it.
However, the generally received opinion that the Baron de Breteuil’s
hatred for the Cardinal was the cause of the scandal and the unfortunate
result of this affair contributed to the disgrace of the former still
more than his refusal to give his granddaughter in marriage to the son of
the Duc de Polignac.  The Abbe de Vermond threw the whole blame of the
imprudence and impolicy of the affair of the Cardinal de Rohan upon the
minister, and ceased to be the friend and supporter of the Baron de
Breteuil with the Queen.
In the early part of the year 1786, the Cardinal, as has been said,
was fully acquitted, and came out of the Bastille, while Madame de
Lamotte was condemned to be whipped, branded, and imprisoned.  The Court,
persisting in the erroneous views which had hitherto guided its measures,
conceived that the Cardinal and the woman De Lamotte were equally
culpable and unequally punished, and sought to restore the balance of
justice by exiling the Cardinal to La Chaise-Dieu, and suffering Madame
de Lamotte to escape a few days after she entered l’Hopital.  This new
error confirmed the Parisians in the idea that the wretch De Lamotte, who
had never been able to make her way so far as to the room appropriated to
the Queen’s women, had really interested the Queen herself.
     [Further particulars will be found in the “Memoirs of the Comte de
     Beugnot” (London: Hurst & Blackett, 1871), as he knew Madame de
     Lamotte from the days of her early childhood (when the three
     children, the Baron de Valois, who died captain of a frigate, and
     the two Mademoiselles de Saint-Remi, the last descendants of the
     Baron de Saint-Remi, a natural son of Henri II., were almost
     starving) to the time of her temporary prosperity.  In fact, he was
     with her when she burnt the correspondence of the Cardinal, in the
     interval the Court foolishly allowed between his arrest and her
     capture, and De Beugnot believed he had met at her house, at the
     moment of their return from their successful trick, the whole party
     engaged in deluding the Cardinal.  It is worth noting that he was
     then struck by the face of Mademoiselle d’Oliva, who had just
     personated the Queen in presenting a rose to the Cardinal.  It may
     also be cited as a pleasing quality of Madame de Lamotte that she,
     “in her ordinary conversation, used the words stupid and honest as
     synonymous."–See “Beugnot,” vol. i., p. 60.]
The Abbe de Vermond could not repress his exultation when he succeeded in
getting the Archbishop of Sens appointed head of the council of finance.
I have more than once heard him say that seventeen years of patience were
not too long a term for success in a Court; that he spent all that time
in gaining the end he had in view; but that at length the Archbishop was
where he ought to be for the good of the State.  The Abbe, from this
time, in the Queen’s private circle no longer concealed his credit and
influence; nothing could equal the confidence with which he displayed the
extent of his pretensions.  He requested the Queen to order that the
apartments appropriated to him should be enlarged, telling her that,
being obliged to give audiences to bishops, cardinals, and ministers, he
required a residence suitable to his present circumstances.  The Queen
continued to treat him as she did before the Archbishop’s arrival at
Court; but the household showed him increased consideration: the word
"Monsieur” preceded that of Abbe; and from that moment not only the
livery servants, but also the people of the antechambers rose when
Monsieur l’Abbe was passing, though there never was, to my knowledge,
any order given to that effect.
The Queen was obliged, on account of the King’s disposition and the very
limited confidence he placed in the Archbishop of Sens, to take a part in
public affairs.  While M. de Maurepas lived she kept out of that danger,
as may be seen by the censure which the Baron de Besenval passes on her
in his memoirs for not availing herself of the conciliation he had
promoted between the Queen and that minister, who counteracted the
ascendency which the Queen and her intimate friends might otherwise have
gained over the King’s mind.
The Queen has often assured me that she never interfered respecting the
interests of Austria but once; and that was only to claim the execution
of the treaty of alliance at the time when Joseph II. was at war with
Prussia and Turkey; that, she then demanded that an army of twenty-four
thousand men should be sent to him instead of fifteen millions, an
alternative which had been left to option in the treaty, in case the
Emperor should have a just war to maintain; that she could not obtain her
object, and M. de Vergennes, in an interview which she had with him upon
the subject, put an end to her importunities by observing that he was
answering the mother of the Dauphin and not the sister of the Emperor.
The fifteen millions were sent.  There was no want of money at Vienna,
and the value of a French army was fully appreciated.
“But how,” said the Queen, “could they be so wicked as to send off those
fifteen millions from the general post-office, diligently publishing,
even to the street porters, that they were loading carriages with money
that I was sending to my brother!–whereas it is certain that the money
would equally have been sent if I had belonged to another house; and,
besides, it was sent contrary to my inclination.”
     [This was not the first time the Queen had become unpopular in
     consequence of financial support afforded by France to her brother.
     The Emperor Joseph II, made, in November, 1783, and in May, 1784,
     startling claims on the republic of the United Provinces; he
     demanded the opening of the Scheldt, the cession of Maeatricht with
     its dependencies, of the country beyond the Meuse, the county of
     Vroenhoven, and a sum of seventy millions of florins.  The first gun
     was fired by the Emperor on the Scheldt 6th November, 1784.  Peace
     was concluded 8th November, 1785, through the mediation of France.
     The singular part was the indemnification granted to the Emperor:
     this was a sum of ten millions of Dutch florins; the articles 15,
     16, and 17 of the treaty stipulated the quotas of it.  Holland paid
     five millions and a half, and France, under the direction of M. de
     Vergennes, four millions and a half of florins, that is to say, nine
     millions and forty-five thousand francs, according to M. Soulavie.
     M. de augur, in his “Policy of Cabinets” (vol. iii.), says relative
     to this affair:
     “M. de Vergennes has been much blamed for having terminated, by a
     sacrifice of seven millions, the contest that existed between the
     United Provinces and the Emperor.  In that age of philosophy men
     were still very uncivilised; in that age of commerce they made very
     erroneous calculations; and those who accused the Queen of sending
     the gold of France to her brother would have been better pleased if,
     to support a republic devoid of energy, the blood of two hundred
     thousand men, and three or four hundred millions of francs, had been
     sacrificed, and at the same time the risk run of losing the
     advantage of peace dictated to England.”  MADAME CAMPAN.]
When the Comte de Moustier set out on his mission to the United States,
after having had his public audience of leave he came and asked me to
procure him a private one.  I could not succeed even with the strongest
solicitations; the Queen desired me to wish him a good voyage, but added
that none but ministers could have anything to say to him in private,
since he was going to a country where the names of King and Queen must be
detested.
Marie Antoinette had then no direct influence over State affairs until
after the deaths of M. de Maurepas and M. de Vergennes, and the
retirement of M. de Calonne.  She frequently regretted her new situation,
and looked upon it as a misfortune which she could not avoid.  One day,
while I was assisting her to tie up a number of memorials and reports,
which some of the ministers had handed to her to be given to the King,
"Ah!” said she, sighing, “there is an end of all happiness for me, since
they have made an intriguer of me.”  I exclaimed at the word.
“Yes,” resumed, the Queen, “that is the right term; every woman who
meddles with affairs above her understanding or out of her line of duty
is an intriguer and nothing else; you will remember, however, that it is
not my own fault, and that it is with regret I give myself such a title;
Queens of France are happy only so long as they meddle with nothing, and
merely preserve influence sufficient to advance their friends and reward
a few zealous servants.  Do you know what happened to me lately?  One day
since I began to attend private committees at the King’s, while crossing
the oiel-de-boeuf, I heard one of the musicians of the chapel say so loud
that I lost not a single word, ’A Queen who does her duty will remain in
her apartment to knit.’ I said within myself, ’Poor wretch, thou art
right; but thou knowest not my situation; I yield to necessity and my
evil destiny.’”
This situation was the more painful to the Queen inasmuch as Louis XVI.
had long accustomed himself to say nothing to her respecting State
affairs; and when, towards the close of his reign, she was obliged to
interfere in the most important matters, the same habit in the King
frequently kept from her particulars which it was necessary she should
have known.  Obtaining, therefore, only insufficient information, and
guided by persons more ambitious than skilful, the Queen could not be
useful in important affairs; yet, at the same time, her ostensible
interference drew upon her, from all parties and all classes of society,
an unpopularity the rapid progress of which alarmed all those who were
sincerely attached to her.
Carried away by the eloquence of the Archbishop of Sens, and encouraged
in the confidence she placed in that minister by the incessant eulogies
of the Abbe de Vermond on his abilities, the Queen unfortunately followed
up her first mistake of bringing him into office in 1787 by supporting
him at the time of his disgrace, which was obtained by the despair of a
whole nation.  She thought it was due to her dignity to give him some
marked proof of her regard at the moment of his departure; misled by her
feelings, she sent him her portrait enriched with jewelry, and a brevet
for the situation of lady of the palace for Madame de Canisy, his niece,
observing that it was necessary to indemnify a minister sacrificed to the
intrigues of the Court and a factious spirit of the nation; that
otherwise none would be found willing to devote themselves to the
interests of the sovereign.
On the day of the Archbishop’s departure the public joy was universal,
both at Court and at Paris there were bonfires; the attorneys’ clerks
burnt the Archbishop in effigy, and on the evening of his disgrace more
than a hundred couriers were sent out from Versailles to spread the happy
tidings among the country seats.  I have seen the Queen shed bitter tears
at the recollection of the errors she committed at this period, when
subsequently, a short time before her death, the Archbishop had the
audacity to say, in a speech which was printed, that the sole object of
one part of his operations, during his administration, was the salutary
crisis which the Revolution had produced.
The benevolence and generosity shown by the King and Queen during the
severe winter of 1788, when the Seine was frozen over and the cold was
more intense than it had been for eighty years, procured them some
fleeting popularity.  The gratitude of the Parisians for the succour
their Majesties poured forth was lively if not lasting.  The snow was so
abundant that since that period there has never been seen such a
prodigious quantity in France.  In different parts of Paris pyramids and
obelisks of snow were erected with inscriptions expressive of the
gratitude of the people.  The pyramid in the Rue d’Angiviller was
supported on a base six feet high by twelve broad; it rose to the height
of fifteen feet, and was terminated by a globe.  Four blocks of stone,
placed at the angles, corresponded with the obelisk, and gave it an
elegant appearance.  Several inscriptions, in honour of the King and
Queen, were affixed to it.  I went to see this singular monument, and
recollect the following inscription
          “Lovely and good, to tender pity true,
          Queen of a virtuous King, this trophy view;
          Cold ice and snow sustain its fragile form,
          But ev’ry grateful heart to thee is warm.
          Oh, may this tribute in your hearts excite,
          Illustrious pair, more pure and real delight,
          Whilst thus your virtues are sincerely prais’d,
          Than pompous domes by servile flatt’ry rais’d.”
The theatres generally rang with praises of the beneficence of the
sovereigns: “La Partie de Chasse de Henri IV.” was represented for the
benefit of the poor.  The receipts were very considerable.
When the fruitless measure of the Assembly of the Notables, and the
rebellious spirit in the parliaments,
     [The Assembly of the Notables, as may be seen in “Weber’s
     Memoirs,” vol. i., overthrew the plans and caused the downfall
     of M. de Calonne.  A prince of the blood presided over each of the
     meetings of that assembly.  Monsieur, afterwards Louis XVIII.,
     presided over the first meeting.
     “Monsieur,” says a contemporary, “gained great reputation at the
     Assembly of the Notables in 1787.  He did not miss attending his
     meeting a single day, and he displayed truly patriotic virtues.
     His care in discussing the weighty matters of administration, in
     throwing light upon them, and in defending the interests and the
     cause of the people, was such as even to inspire the King with some
     degree of jealousy.  Monsieur openly said that a respectful
     resistance to the orders of the monarch was not blamable, and that
     authority might be met by argument, and forced to receive
     information without any offence whatever."–NOTE BY THE EDITOR.]
had created the necessity for States General, it was long discussed in
council whether they should be assembled at Versailles or at forty or
sixty leagues from the capital; the Queen was for the latter course, and
insisted to the King that they ought to be far away from the immense
population of Paris.  She feared that the people would influence the
deliberations of the deputies; several memorials were presented to the
King upon that question; but M. Necker prevailed, and Versailles was the
place fixed upon.
The day on which the King announced that he gave his consent to the
convocation of the States General, the Queen left the public dinner,
and placed herself in the recess of the first window of her bedchamber,
with her face towards the garden.  Her chief butler followed her, to
present her coffee, which she usually took standing, as she was about to
leave the table.  She beckoned to me to come close to her.  The King was
engaged in conversation with some one in his room.  When the attendant
had served her he retired; and she addressed me, with the cup still in
her hand: “Great Heavens! what fatal news goes forth this day!  The King
assents to the convocation of the States General.”  Then she added,
raising her eyes to heaven, “I dread it; this important event is a first
fatal signal of discord in France.”  She cast her eyes down, they were
filled with tears.  She could not take the remainder of her coffee, but
handed me the cup, and went to join the King.  In the evening, when she
was alone with me, she spoke only of this momentous decision.  “It is the
Parliament,” said she, “that has compelled the King to have recourse to a
measure long considered fatal to the repose of the kingdom.  These
gentlemen wish to restrain the power of the King; but they give a great
shock to the authority of which they make so bad a use, and they will
bring on their own destruction.”
The double representation granted to the Tiers Etat was now the chief
topic of conversation.  The Queen favoured this plan, to which the King
had agreed; she thought the hope of obtaining ecclesiastical favours
would secure the clergy of the second order, and that M. Necker was sure
to have the same degree of influence over the lawyers, and other people
of that class comprised in the Tiers Dat.  The Comte d’Artois, holding
the contrary opinion, presented a memorial in the names of himself and
several princes of the blood to the King against the double
representation.  The Queen was displeased with him for this; her
confidential advisers infused into her apprehensions that the Prince was
made the tool of a party; but his conduct was approved of by Madame de
Polignac’s circle, which the Queen thenceforward only frequented to avoid
the appearance of a change in her habits.  She almost always returned
unhappy; she was treated with the profound respect due to a queen, but
the devotion of friendship had vanished, to make way for the coldness of
etiquette, which wounded her deeply.  The alienation between her and the
Comte Artois was also very painful to her, for she had loved him almost
as tenderly as if he had been her own brother.
The opening of the States General took place on the 4th of May, 1789.
The Queen on that occasion appeared for the last time in her life in
regal magnificence.  During the procession some low women, seeing the
Queen pass, cried out “Vive le Duc d’ Orleans!”  in so threatening a
manner that she nearly fainted.  She was obliged to be supported, and
those about her were afraid it would be necessary to stop the procession.
The Queen, however, recovered herself, and much regretted that she had
not been able to command more presence of mind.
The rapidly increasing distrust of the King and Queen shown by the
populace was greatly attributable to incessant corruption by English
gold, and the projects, either of revenge or of ambition, of the Duc
d’Orleans.  Let it not be thought that this accusation is founded on what
has been so often repeated by the heads of the French Government since
the Revolution.  Twice between the 14th of July and the 6th of October,
1789, the day on which the Court was dragged to Paris, the Queen
prevented me from making little excursions thither of business or
pleasure, saying to me, “Do not go on such a day to Paris; the English
have been scattering gold, we shall have some disturbance.”  The repeated
visits of the Duc d’Orleans to England had excited the Anglomania to such
a pitch that Paris was no longer distinguishable from London.  The
French, formerly imitated by the whole of Europe, became on a sudden a
nation of imitators, without considering the evils that arts and
manufactures must suffer in consequence of the change.  Since the treaty
of commerce made with England at the peace of 1783, not merely equipages,
but everything, even to ribands and common earthenware, were of English
make.  If this predominance of English fashions had been confined to
filling our drawing-rooms with young men in English frock-coats, instead
of the French dress, good taste and commerce might alone have suffered;
but the principles of English government had taken possession of these
young heads.  Constitution, Upper House, Lower House, national guarantee,
balance of power, Magna Charta, Law of Habeas Corpus,–all these words
were incessantly repeated, and seldom understood; but they were of
fundamental importance to a party which was then forming.
The first sitting of the States took place on the following day.  The
King delivered his speech with firmness and dignity; the Queen told me
that he had taken great pains about it, and had repeated it frequently.
His Majesty gave public marks of attachment and respect for the Queen,
who was applauded; but it was easy to see that this applause was in fact
rendered to the King alone.
It was evident, during the first sittings, that Mirabeau would be very
dangerous to the Government.  It affirmed that at this period he
communicated to the King, and still more fully to the Queen, part of his
schemes for abandoning them.  He brandished the weapons afforded him by
his eloquence and audacity, in order to make terms with the party he
meant to attack.  This man played the game of revolution to make his own
fortune.  The Queen told me that he asked for an embassy, and, if my
memory does not deceive me, it was that of Constantinople.  He was
refused with well-deserved contempt, though policy would doubtless have
concealed it, could the future have been foreseen.
The enthusiasm prevailing at the opening of this assembly, and the
debates between the Tiers Etat, the nobility, and even the clergy, daily
increased the alarm of their Majesties, and all who were attached to the
cause of monarchy.  The Queen went to bed late, or rather she began to be
unable to rest.  One evening, about the end of May, she was sitting in
her room, relating several remarkable occurrences of the day; four wax
candles were placed upon her toilet-table; the first went out of itself;
I relighted it; shortly afterwards the second, and then the third went
out also; upon which the Queen, squeezing my hand in terror, said to me:
"Misfortune makes us superstitious; if the fourth taper should go out
like the rest, nothing can prevent my looking upon it as a sinister
omen.”  The fourth taper went out.  It was remarked to the Queen that the
four tapers had probably been run in the same mould, and that a defect in
the wick had naturally occurred at the same point in each, since the
candles had all gone out in the order in which they had been lighted.
The deputies of the Tiers Etat arrived at Versailles full of the
strongest prejudices against the Court.  They believed that the King
indulged in the pleasures of the table to a shameful excess; and that the
Queen was draining the treasury of the State in order to satisfy the most
unbridled luxury.  They almost all determined to see Petit Trianon.  The
extreme plainness of the retreat in question not answering the ideas they
had formed, some of them insisted upon seeing the very smallest closets,
saying that the richly furnished apartments were concealed from them.
They particularised one which, according to them, was ornamented with
diamonds, and with wreathed columns studded with sapphires and rubies.
The Queen could not get these foolish ideas out of her mind, and spoke to
the King on the subject.  From the description given of this room by the
deputies to the keepers of Trianon, the King concluded that they were
looking for the scene enriched with paste ornaments, made in the reign of
Louis XV. for the theatre of Fontainebleau.
The King supposed that his Body Guards, on their return to the country,
after their quarterly duty at Court, related what they had seen, and that
their exaggerated accounts, being repeated, became at last totally
perverted.  This idea of the King, after the search for the diamond
chamber, suggested to the Queen that the report of the King’s propensity
for drinking also sprang from the guards who accompanied his carriage
when he hunted at Rambouillet.  The King, who disliked sleeping out of
his usual bed, was accustomed to leave that hunting-seat after supper;
he generally slept soundly in his carriage, and awoke only on his arrival
at the courtyard of his palace; he used to get down from his carriage in
the midst of his Body Guards, staggering, as a man half awake will do,
which was mistaken for intoxication.
The majority of the deputies who came imbued with prejudices produced by
error or malevolence, went to lodge with the most humble private
individuals of Versailles, whose inconsiderate conversation contributed
not a little to nourish such mistakes.  Everything, in short, tended to
render the deputies subservient to the schemes of the leaders of the
rebellion.
Shortly after the opening of the States General the first Dauphin died.
That young Prince suffered from the rickets, which in a few months curved
his spine, and rendered his legs so weak that he could not walk without
being supported like a feeble old man.
     [Louis, Dauphin of France, who died at Versailles on the 4th of
     June, 1789, gave promise of intellectual precocity.  The following
     particulars, which convey some idea of his disposition, and of the
     assiduous attention bestowed upon him by the Duchesse de Polignac,
     will be found in a work of that time: “At two years old the Dauphin
     was very pretty; he articulated well, and answered questions put to
     him intelligently.  While he was at the Chateau de La Muette
     everybody was at liberty to see him.  The Dauphin was dressed
     plainly, like a sailor; there was nothing to distinguish him from
     other children in external appearance but the cross of Saint Louis,
     the blue ribbon, and the Order of the Fleece, decorations that are
     the distinctive signs of his rank.  The Duchesse Jules de Polignac,
     his governess, scarcely ever left him for a single instant: she gave
     up all the Court excursions and amusements in order to devote her
     whole attention to him.  The Prince always manifested a great regard
     for M. de Bourset, his valet de chambre.  During the illness of
     which he died, he one day asked for a pair of scissors; that
     gentleman reminded him that they were forbidden.  The child insisted
     mildly, and they were obliged to yield to him.  Having got the
     scissors, he cut off a lock of his hair, which he wrapped in a sheet
     of paper: ’There, monsieur,’ said he to his valet de chambre,’ there
     is the only present I can make you, having nothing at my command;
     but when I am dead you will present this pledge to my papa and
     mamma; and while they remember me, I hope they will not forget
     you.’"–NOTE BY THE EDITOR.]
How many maternal tears did his condition draw from the Queen, already
overwhelmed with apprehensions respecting the state of the kingdom!  Her
grief was enhanced by petty intrigues, which, when frequently renewed,
became intolerable.  An open quarrel between the families and friends of
the Duc Harcourt, the Dauphin’s governor, and those of the Duchesse de
Polignac, his governess, added greatly to the Queen’s affliction.  The
young Prince showed a strong dislike to the Duchesse de Polignac, who
attributed it either to the Duc or the Duchesse d’Harcourt, and came to
make her complaints respecting it to the Queen.  The Dauphin twice sent
her out of his room, saying to her, with that maturity of manner which
long illness always gives to children: “Go out, Duchess; you are so fond
of using perfumes, and they always make me ill;” and yet she never used
any.  The Queen perceived, also, that his prejudices against her friend
extended to herself; her son would no longer speak in her presence.  She
knew that he had become fond of sweetmeats, and offered him some
marshmallow and jujube lozenges.  The under-governors and the first valet
de chambre requested her not to give the Dauphin anything, as he was to
receive no food of any kind without the consent of the faculty.
I forbear to describe the wound this prohibition inflicted upon the
Queen; she felt it the more deeply because she was aware it was unjustly
believed she gave a decided preference to the Duc de Normandie, whose
ruddy health and amiability did, in truth, form a striking contrast to
the languid look and melancholy disposition of his elder brother.  She
even suspected that a plot had for some time existed to deprive her of
the affection of a child whom she loved as a good and tender mother
ought.  Previous to the audience granted by the King on the 10th August,
1788, to the envoy of the Sultan Tippoo Saib, she had begged the Duc
d’Harcourt to divert the Dauphin, whose deformity was already apparent,
from his, intention to be present at that ceremony, being unwilling to
expose him to the gaze of the crowd of inquisitive Parisians who would be
in the gallery.  Notwithstanding this injunction, the Dauphin was
suffered to write to his mother, requesting her permission to be present
at the audience.  The Queen was obliged to refuse him, and warmly
reproached the governor, who merely answered that he could not oppose the
wishes of a sick child.  A year before the death of the Dauphin the Queen
lost the Princesse Sophie; this was, as the Queen said, the first of a
series of misfortunes.
NOTE:  As Madame Campan has stated in the foregoing pages that the money
to foment sedition was furnished from English sources, the decree of the
Convention of August, 1793, maybe quoted as illustrative of the entente
cordiale alleged to exist between the insurrectionary Government and its
friends across the Channel!  The endeavours made by the English
Government to save the unfortunate King are well known.  The motives
prompting the conduct of the Duc d’Orleans are equally well known.
Art.  i.  The National Convention denounces the British Government to
Europe and the English nation.
Art.  ii.  Every Frenchman that shall place his money in the English
funds shall be declared a traitor to his country.
Art.  iii.  Every Frenchman who has money in the English funds or those
of any other Power with whom France is at war shall be obliged to declare
the same.
Art.  iv.  All foreigners, subjects of the Powers now at war with France,
particularly the English, shall be arrested, and seals put upon their
papers.
Art.  v.  The barriers of Paris shall be instantly shut.
Art.  vi.  All good citizens shall be required in the name of the country
to search for the foreigners concerned in any plot denounced.
Art.  vii.  Three millions shall be at the disposal of the Minister at
War to facilitate the march of the garrison of Mentz to La Vendee.
Art.  viii.  The Minister at War shall send to the army on the coast of
Rochelle all the combustible materials necessary to set fire to the
forests and underwood of La Vendee.
Art.  ix.  The women, the children, and old men shall be conducted to the
interior parts of the country.
Art.  x.  The property of the rebels shall be confiscated for the benefit
of the Republic.
Art.  xi.  A camp shall be formed without delay between Paris and the
Northern army.
Art.  xii.  All the family of the Capets shall be banished from the
French territory, those excepted who are under the sword of the law, and
the offspring of Louis Capet, who shall both remain in the Temple.
Art.  xiii.  Marie Antoinette shall be delivered over to the
Revolutionary Tribunal, and shall be immediately conducted to the prison
of the Conciergerie.  Louise Elisabeth shall remain in the Temple till
after the judgment of Marie Antoinette.
Art.  xiv.  All the tombs of the Kings which are at St. Denis and in the
departments shall be destroyed on August the 10th.
Art.  xv.  The present decree shall be despatched by extraordinary
couriers to all the departments.

This eBook of “Memoirs of Marie Antoinette” (Part A, also see Part B) by Madame Campan belongs to the public domain.

