




[172] As Florian Deleal walked, one hot afternoon, he overtook by the
wayside a poor aged man, and, as he seemed weary with the road,
helped him on with the burden which he carried, a certain distance.
And as the man told his story, it chanced that he named the place, a
little place in the neighbourhood of a great city, where Florian had
passed his earliest years, but which he had never since seen, and,
the story told, went forward on his journey comforted.  And that
night, like a reward for his pity, a dream of that place came to
Florian, a dream which did for him the office of the finer sort of
memory, bringing its object to mind with a great clearness, yet, as
sometimes happens in dreams, raised a little above itself, and above
ordinary retrospect.  The true aspect of the place, especially of the
house there in which he had lived as a child, the fashion of its
doors, its hearths, its windows, the very scent upon the air of it,
was with him in sleep for a season; only, with tints more musically
blent on wall [173] and floor, and some finer light and shadow
running in and out along its curves and angles, and with all its
little carvings daintier.  He awoke with a sigh at the thought of
almost thirty years which lay between him and that place, yet with a
flutter of pleasure still within him at the fair light, as if it
were a smile, upon it.  And it happened that this accident of his
dream was just the thing needed for the beginning of a certain design
he then had in view, the noting, namely, of some things in the story
of his spirit–in that process of brain-building by which we are,
each one of us, what we are.  With the image of the place so clear
and favourable upon him, he fell to thinking of himself therein, and
how his thoughts had grown up to him.  In that half-spiritualised
house he could watch the better, over again, the gradual expansion of
the soul which had come to be there–of which indeed, through the law
which makes the material objects about them so large an element in
children’s lives, it had actually become a part; inward and outward
being woven through and through each other into one inextricable
texture–half, tint and trace and accident of homely colour and form,
from the wood and the bricks; half, mere soul-stuff, floated thither
from who knows how far.  In the house and garden of his dream he saw
a child moving, and could divide the main streams at least of
the winds that had played on [174] him, and study so the first stage
in that mental journey.
The old house, as when Florian talked of it afterwards he always
called it, (as all children do, who can recollect a change of home,
soon enough but not too soon to mark a period in their lives) really
was an old house; and an element of French descent in its inmates–
descent from Watteau, the old court-painter, one of whose gallant
pieces still hung in one of the rooms–might explain, together with
some other things, a noticeable trimness and comely whiteness about
everything there–the curtains, the couches, the paint on the walls
with which the light and shadow played so delicately; might explain
also the tolerance of the great poplar in the garden, a tree most
often despised by English people, but which French people love,
having observed a certain fresh way its leaves have of dealing with
the wind, making it sound, in never so slight a stirring of the air,
like running water.
The old-fashioned, low wainscoting went round the rooms, and up the
staircase with carved balusters and shadowy angles, landing half-way
up at a broad window, with a swallow’s nest below the sill, and the
blossom of an old pear-tree showing across it in late April, against
the blue, below which the perfumed juice of the find of fallen fruit
in autumn was so fresh.  At the next turning came the closet which
held on its deep shelves the best china.  Little angel [175] faces
and reedy flutings stood out round the fireplace of the children’s
room.  And on the top of the house, above the large attic, where the
white mice ran in the twilight–an infinite, unexplored wonderland of
childish treasures, glass beads, empty scent-bottles still sweet,
thrum of coloured silks, among its lumber–a flat space of roof,
railed round, gave a view of the neighbouring steeples; for the
house, as I said, stood near a great city, which sent up heavenwards,
over the twisting weather-vanes, not seldom, its beds of rolling
cloud and smoke, touched with storm or sunshine.  But the child of
whom I am writing did not hate the fog because of the crimson lights
which fell from it sometimes upon the chimneys, and the whites which
gleamed through its openings, on summer mornings, on turret or
pavement.  For it is false to suppose that a child’s sense of beauty
is dependent on any choiceness or special fineness, in the objects
which present themselves to it, though this indeed comes to be the
rule with most of us in later life; earlier, in some degree, we see
inwardly; and the child finds for itself, and with unstinted delight,
a difference for the sense, in those whites and reds through the
smoke on very homely buildings, and in the gold of the dandelions at
the road-side, just beyond the houses, where not a handful of earth
is virgin and untouched, in the lack of better ministries to its
desire of beauty.
[176] This house then stood not far beyond the gloom and rumours of
the town, among high garden-wall, bright all summer-time with Golden-
rod, and brown-and-golden Wall-flower–Flos Parietis, as the
children’s Latin-reading father taught them to call it, while he was
with them.  Tracing back the threads of his complex spiritual habit,
as he was used in after years to do, Florian found that he owed to
the place many tones of sentiment afterwards customary with him,
certain inward lights under which things most naturally presented
themselves to him.  The coming and going of travellers to the town
along the way, the shadow of the streets, the sudden breath of the
neighbouring gardens, the singular brightness of bright weather
there, its singular darknesses which linked themselves in his mind to
certain engraved illustrations in the old big Bible at home, the
coolness of the dark, cavernous shops round the great church, with
its giddy winding stair up to the pigeons and the bells–a citadel of
peace in the heart of the trouble–all this acted on his childish
fancy, so that ever afterwards the like aspects and incidents never
failed to throw him into a well-recognised imaginative mood, seeming
actually to have become a part of the texture of his mind.  Also,
Florian could trace home to this point a pervading preference in
himself for a kind of comeliness and dignity, an urbanity literally,
in modes of life, which he connected with the pale [177] people of
towns, and which made him susceptible to a kind of exquisite
satisfaction in the trimness and well-considered grace of certain
things and persons he afterwards met with, here and there, in his way
through the world.
So the child of whom I am writing lived on there quietly; things
without thus ministering to him, as he sat daily at the window with
the birdcage hanging below it, and his mother taught him to read,
wondering at the ease with which he learned, and at the quickness of
his memory.  The perfume of the little flowers of the lime-tree fell
through the air upon them like rain; while time seemed to move ever
more slowly to the murmur of the bees in it, till it almost stood
still on June afternoons.  How insignificant, at the moment, seem the
influences of the sensible things which are tossed and fall and lie
about us, so, or so, in the environment of early childhood.  How
indelibly, as we afterwards discover, they affect us; with what
capricious attractions and associations they figure themselves on the
white paper, the smooth wax, of our ingenuous souls, as “with lead in
the rock for ever,” giving form and feature, and as it were assigned
house-room in our memory, to early experiences of feeling and
thought, which abide with us ever afterwards, thus, and not
otherwise.  The realities and passions, the rumours of the greater
world without, steal in upon us, each by its own special little
passage-way, through the wall of custom [178] about us; and never
afterwards quite detach themselves from this or that accident, or
trick, in the mode of their first entrance to us.  Our
susceptibilities, the discovery of our powers, manifold experiences–
our various experiences of the coming and going of bodily pain, for
instance–belong to this or the other well-remembered place in the
material habitation–that little white room with the window across
which the heavy blossoms could beat so peevishly in the wind, with
just that particular catch or throb, such a sense of teasing in it,
on gusty mornings; and the early habitation thus gradually becomes a
sort of material shrine or sanctuary of sentiment; a system of
visible symbolism interweaves itself through all our thoughts and
passions; and irresistibly, little shapes, voices, accidents–the
angle at which the sun in the morning fell on the pillow–become
parts of the great chain wherewith we are bound.
Thus far, for Florian, what all this had determined was a peculiarly
strong sense of home–so forcible a motive with all of us–prompting
to us our customary love of the earth, and the larger part of our
fear of death, that revulsion we have from it, as from something
strange, untried, unfriendly; though life-long imprisonment, they
tell you, and final banishment from home is a thing bitterer still;
the looking forward to but a short space, a mere childish gouter and
dessert of it, before the end, being so great a resource of [179]
effort to pilgrims and wayfarers, and the soldier in distant
quarters, and lending, in lack of that, some power of solace to the
thought of sleep in the home churchyard, at least–dead cheek by dead
cheek, and with the rain soaking in upon one from above.
So powerful is this instinct, and yet accidents like those I have
been speaking of so mechanically determine it; its essence being
indeed the early familiar, as constituting our ideal, or typical
conception, of rest and security.  Out of so many possible
conditions, just this for you and that for me, brings ever the
unmistakeable realisation of the delightful chez soi; this for the
Englishman, for me and you, with the closely-drawn white curtain and
the shaded lamp; that, quite other, for the wandering Arab, who folds
his tent every morning, and makes his sleeping-place among haunted
ruins, or in old tombs.
With Florian then the sense of home became singularly intense, his
good fortune being that the special character of his home was in
itself so essentially home-like.  As after many wanderings I have
come to fancy that some parts of Surrey and Kent are, for Englishmen,
the true landscape, true home-counties, by right, partly, of a
certain earthy warmth in the yellow of the sand below their gorse-
bushes, and of a certain grey-blue mist after rain, in the hollows of
the hills there, welcome to fatigued eyes, and never seen farther
south; so I think that the sort of [180] house I have described, with
precisely those proportions of red-brick and green, and with a just
perceptible monotony in the subdued order of it, for its
distinguishing note, is for Englishmen at least typically home-life.
And so for Florian that general human instinct was reinforced by this
special home-likeness in the place his wandering soul had happened to
light on, as, in the second degree, its body and earthly tabernacle;
the sense of harmony between his soul and its physical environment
became, for a time at least, like perfectly played music, and the
life led there singularly tranquil and filled with a curious sense of
self-possession.  The love of security, of an habitually undisputed
standing-ground or sleeping-place, came to count for much in the
generation and correcting of his thoughts, and afterwards as a
salutary principle of restraint in all his wanderings of spirit.  The
wistful yearning towards home, in absence from it, as the shadows of
evening deepened, and he followed in thought what was doing there
from hour to hour, interpreted to him much of a yearning and regret
he experienced afterwards, towards he knew not what, out of strange
ways of feeling and thought in which, from time to time, his spirit
found itself alone; and in the tears shed in such absences there
seemed always to be some soul-subduing foretaste of what his last
tears might be.
And the sense of security could hardly have [181] been deeper, the
quiet of the child’s soul being one with the quiet of its home, a
place “inclosed” and “sealed.”  But upon this assured place, upon the
child’s assured soul which resembled it, there came floating in from
the larger world without, as at windows left ajar unknowingly, or
over the high garden walls, two streams of impressions, the
sentiments of beauty and pain–recognitions of the visible, tangible,
audible loveliness of things, as a very real and somewhat tyrannous
element in them–and of the sorrow of the world, of grown people and
children and animals, as a thing not to be put by in them.  From this
point he could trace two predominant processes of mental change in
him–the growth of an almost diseased sensibility to the spectacle of
suffering, and, parallel with this, the rapid growth of a certain
capacity of fascination by bright colour and choice form–the sweet
curvings, for instance, of the lips of those who seemed to him comely
persons, modulated in such delicate unison to the things they said or
sang,–marking early the activity in him of a more than customary
sensuousness, “the lust of the eye,” as the Preacher says, which
might lead him, one day, how far!  Could he have foreseen the
weariness of the way!  In music sometimes the two sorts of
impressions came together, and he would weep, to the surprise of
older people.  Tears of joy too the child knew, also to older
people’s surprise; real tears, once, of relief from long-strung,
[182] childish expectation, when he found returned at evening, with
new roses in her cheeks, the little sister who had been to a place
where there was a wood, and brought back for him a treasure of fallen
acorns, and black crow’s feathers, and his peace at finding her again
near him mingled all night with some intimate sense of the distant
forest, the rumour of its breezes, with the glossy blackbirds aslant
and the branches lifted in them, and of the perfect nicety of the
little cups that fell.  So those two elementary apprehensions of the
tenderness and of the colour in things grew apace in him, and were
seen by him afterwards to send their roots back into the beginnings
of life.
Let me note first some of the occasions of his recognition of the
element of pain in things–incidents, now and again, which seemed
suddenly to awake in him the whole force of that sentiment which
Goethe has called the Weltschmerz, and in which the concentrated
sorrow of the world seemed suddenly to lie heavy upon him.  A book
lay in an old book-case, of which he cared to remember one picture–a
woman sitting, with hands bound behind her, the dress, the cap, the
hair, folded with a simplicity which touched him strangely, as if not
by her own hands, but with some ambiguous care at the hands of
others–Queen Marie Antoinette, on her way to execution–we all
remember David’s drawing, meant merely to make her ridiculous.  The
face [183] that had been so high had learned to be mute and
resistless; but out of its very resistlessness, seemed now to call on
men to have pity, and forbear; and he took note of that, as he closed
the book, as a thing to look at again, if he should at any time
find himself tempted to be cruel.  Again, he would never quite forget
the appeal in the small sister’s face, in the garden under the
lilacs, terrified at a spider lighted on her sleeve.  He could trace
back to the look then noted a certain mercy he conceived always for
people in fear, even of little things, which seemed to make him,
though but for a moment, capable of almost any sacrifice of himself.
Impressible, susceptible persons, indeed, who had had their sorrows,
lived about him; and this sensibility was due in part to the tacit
influence of their presence, enforcing upon him habitually the fact
that there are those who pass their days, as a matter of course, in a
sort of “going quietly.”  Most poignantly of all he could recall, in
unfading minutest circumstance, the cry on the stair, sounding
bitterly through the house, and struck into his soul for ever, of an
aged woman, his father’s sister, come now to announce his death in
distant India; how it seemed to make the aged woman like a child
again; and, he knew not why, but this fancy was full of pity to him.
There were the little sorrows of the dumb animals too–of the white
angora, with a dark tail like an ermine’s, and a face like a [184]
flower, who fell into a lingering sickness, and became quite
delicately human in its valetudinarianism, and came to have a hundred
different expressions of voice–how it grew worse and worse, till it
began to feel the light too much for it, and at last, after one wild
morning of pain, the little soul flickered away from the body, quite
worn to death already, and now but feebly retaining it.
So he wanted another pet; and as there were starlings about the
place, which could be taught to speak, one of them was caught, and he
meant to treat it kindly; but in the night its young ones could be
heard crying after it, and the responsive cry of the mother-bird
towards them; and at last, with the first light, though not till
after some debate with himself, he went down and opened the cage, and
saw a sharp bound of the prisoner up to her nestlings; and therewith
came the sense of remorse,–that he too was become an accomplice in
moving, to the limit of his small power, the springs and handles of
that great machine in things, constructed so ingeniously to play
pain-fugues on the delicate nerve-work of living creatures.
I have remarked how, in the process of our brain-building, as the
house of thought in which we live gets itself together, like some
airy bird’s-nest of floating thistle-down and chance straws, compact
at last, little accidents have their consequence; and thus it
happened that, as he [185] walked one evening, a garden gate, usually
closed, stood open; and lo! within, a great red hawthorn in full
flower, embossing heavily the bleached and twisted trunk and
branches, so aged that there were but few green leaves thereon–a
plumage of tender, crimson fire out of the heart of the dry wood.
The perfume of the tree had now and again reached him, in the
currents of the wind, over the wall, and he had wondered what might
be behind it, and was now allowed to fill his arms with the flowers–
flowers enough for all the old blue-china pots along the chimney-
piece, making fete in the children’s room.  Was it some periodic
moment in the expansion of soul within him, or mere trick of heat in
the heavily-laden summer air?
But the beauty of the thing struck home to him feverishly; and in
dreams all night he loitered along a magic roadway of crimson
flowers, which seemed to open ruddily in thick, fresh masses about
his feet, and fill softly all the little hollows in the banks on
either side.  Always afterwards, summer by summer, as the flowers
came on, the blossom of the red hawthorn still seemed to him
absolutely the reddest of all things; and the goodly crimson, still
alive in the works of old Venetian masters or old Flemish tapestries,
called out always from afar the recollection of the flame in those
perishing little petals, as it pulsed gradually out of them, kept
long in the drawers of an old cabinet.
[186] Also then, for the first time, he seemed to experience a
passionateness in his relation to fair outward objects, an
inexplicable excitement in their presence, which disturbed him, and
from which he half longed to be free.  A touch of regret or desire
mingled all night with the remembered presence of the red flowers,
and their perfume in the darkness about him; and the longing for some
undivined, entire possession of them was the beginning of a
revelation to him, growing ever clearer, with the coming of the
gracious summer guise of fields and trees and persons in each
succeeding year, of a certain, at times seemingly exclusive,
predominance in his interests, of beautiful physical things, a kind
of tyranny of the senses over him.
In later years he came upon philosophies which occupied him much in
the estimate of the proportion of the sensuous and the ideal elements
in human knowledge, the relative parts they bear in it; and, in his
intellectual scheme, was led to assign very little to the abstract
thought, and much to its sensible vehicle or occasion.  Such
metaphysical speculation did but reinforce what was instinctive in
his way of receiving the world, and for him, everywhere, that
sensible vehicle or occasion became, perhaps only too surely, the
necessary concomitant of any perception of things, real enough to be
of any weight or reckoning, in his house of thought.  There were
times when he could think of the [187] necessity he was under of
associating all thoughts to touch and sight, as a sympathetic link
between himself and actual, feeling, living objects; a protest in
favour of real men and women against mere grey, unreal abstractions;
and he remembered gratefully how the Christian religion, hardly less
than the religion of the ancient Greeks, translating so much of its
spiritual verity into things that may be seen, condescends in part to
sanction this infirmity, if so it be, of our human existence, wherein
the world of sense is so much with us, and welcomed this thought as a
kind of keeper and sentinel over his soul therein.  But certainly, he
came more and more to be unable to care for, or think of soul but as
in an actual body, or of any world but that wherein are water and
trees, and where men and women look, so or so, and press actual
hands.  It was the trick even his pity learned, fastening those who
suffered in anywise to his affections by a kind of sensible
attachments.  He would think of Julian, fallen into incurable
sickness, as spoiled in the sweet blossom of his skin like pale
amber, and his honey-like hair; of Cecil, early dead, as cut off from
the lilies, from golden summer days, from women’s voices; and then
what comforted him a little was the thought of the turning of the
child’s flesh to violets in the turf above him.  And thinking of the
very poor, it was not the things which most men care most for that he
yearned to give them; [188] but fairer roses, perhaps, and power to
taste quite as they will, at their ease and not task-burdened, a
certain desirable, clear light in the new morning, through which
sometimes he had noticed them, quite unconscious of it, on their way
to their early toil.
So he yielded himself to these things, to be played upon by them like
a musical instrument, and began to note with deepening watchfulness,
but always with some puzzled, unutterable longing in his enjoyment,
the phases of the seasons and of the growing or waning day, down even
to the shadowy changes wrought on bare wall or ceiling–the light
cast up from the snow, bringing out their darkest angles; the brown
light in the cloud, which meant rain; that almost too austere
clearness, in the protracted light of the lengthening day, before
warm weather began, as if it lingered but to make a severer workday,
with the school-books opened earlier and later; that beam of June
sunshine, at last, as he lay awake before the time, a way of gold-
dust across the darkness; all the humming, the freshness, the perfume
of the garden seemed to lie upon it–and coming in one afternoon in
September, along the red gravel walk, to look for a basket of yellow
crab-apples left in the cool, old parlour, he remembered it the more,
and how the colours struck upon him, because a wasp on one bitten
apple stung him, and he felt the passion of [189] sudden, severe
pain.  For this too brought its curious reflexions; and, in relief
from it, he would wonder over it–how it had then been with him–
puzzled at the depth of the charm or spell over him, which lay, for a
little while at least, in the mere absence of pain; once, especially,
when an older boy taught him to make flowers of sealing-wax, and he
had burnt his hand badly at the lighted taper, and been unable to
sleep.  He remembered that also afterwards, as a sort of typical
thing–a white vision of heat about him, clinging closely, through
the languid scent of the ointments put upon the place to make it
well.
Also, as he felt this pressure upon him of the sensible world, then,
as often afterwards, there would come another sort of curious
questioning how the last impressions of eye and ear might happen to
him, how they would find him–the scent of the last flower, the soft
yellowness of the last morning, the last recognition of some object
of affection, hand or voice; it could not be but that the latest look
of the eyes, before their final closing, would be strangely vivid;
one would go with the hot tears, the cry, the touch of the wistful
bystander, impressed how deeply on one! or would it be, perhaps, a
mere frail retiring of all things, great or little, away from one,
into a level distance?
For with this desire of physical beauty mingled itself early the fear
of death–the fear of death [190] intensified by the desire of
beauty.  Hitherto he had never gazed upon dead faces, as sometimes,
afterwards, at the Morgue in Paris, or in that fair cemetery at
Munich, where all the dead must go and lie in state before burial,
behind glass windows, among the flowers and incense and holy candles-
-the aged clergy with their sacred ornaments, the young men in their
dancing-shoes and spotless white linen–after which visits, those
waxen, resistless faces would always live with him for many days,
making the broadest sunshine sickly.  The child had heard indeed of
the death of his father, and how, in the Indian station, a fever had
taken him, so that though not in action he had yet died as a soldier;
and hearing of the “resurrection of the just,” he could think of him
as still abroad in the world, somehow, for his protection–a grand,
though perhaps rather terrible figure, in beautiful soldier’s things,
like the figure in the picture of Joshua’s Vision in the Bible–and
of that, round which the mourners moved so softly, and afterwards
with such solemn singing, as but a worn-out garment left at a
deserted lodging.  So it was, until on a summer day he walked with
his mother through a fair churchyard.  In a bright dress he rambled
among the graves, in the gay weather, and so came, in one corner,
upon an open grave for a child–a dark space on the brilliant grass–
the black mould lying heaped up round it, weighing down the little
jewelled [191] branches of the dwarf rose-bushes in flower.  And
therewith came, full-grown, never wholly to leave him, with the
certainty that even children do sometimes die, the physical horror of
death, with its wholly selfish recoil from the association of lower
forms of life, and the suffocating weight above.  No benign, grave
figure in beautiful soldier’s things any longer abroad in the world
for his protection! only a few poor, piteous bones; and above them,
possibly, a certain sort of figure he hoped not to see.  For sitting
one day in the garden below an open window, he heard people talking,
and could not but listen, how, in a sleepless hour, a sick woman had
seen one of the dead sitting beside her, come to call her hence; and
from the broken talk evolved with much clearness the notion that not
all those dead people had really departed to the churchyard, nor were
quite so motionless as they looked, but led a secret, half-fugitive
life in their old homes, quite free by night, though sometimes
visible in the day, dodging from room to room, with no great goodwill
towards those who shared the place with them.  All night the figure
sat beside him in the reveries of his broken sleep, and was not quite
gone in the morning–an odd, irreconcileable new member of the
household, making the sweet familiar chambers unfriendly and suspect
by its uncertain presence.  He could have hated the dead he had
pitied so, for being [192] thus.  Afterwards he came to think of
those poor, home-returning ghosts, which all men have fancied to
themselves–the revenants–pathetically, as crying, or beating with
vain hands at the doors, as the wind came, their cries
distinguishable in it as a wilder inner note.  But, always making
death more unfamiliar still, that old experience would ever, from
time to time, return to him; even in the living he sometimes caught
its likeness; at any time or place, in a moment, the faint atmosphere
of the chamber of death would be breathed around him, and the image
with the bound chin, the quaint smile, the straight, stiff feet, shed
itself across the air upon the bright carpet, amid the gayest
company, or happiest communing with himself.
To most children the sombre questionings to which impressions like
these attach themselves, if they come at all, are actually suggested
by religious books, which therefore they often regard with much
secret distaste, and dismiss, as far as possible, from their habitual
thoughts as a too depressing element in life.  To Florian such
impressions, these misgivings as to the ultimate tendency of the
years, of the relationship between life and death, had been suggested
spontaneously in the natural course of his mental growth by a strong
innate sense for the soberer tones in things, further strengthened by
actual circumstances; and religious sentiment, that [193] system of
biblical ideas in which he had been brought up, presented itself to
him as a thing that might soften and dignify, and light up as with a
“lively hope,” a melancholy already deeply settled in him.  So he
yielded himself easily to religious impressions, and with a kind of
mystical appetite for sacred things; the more as they came to him
through a saintly person who loved him tenderly, and believed that
this early pre-occupation with them already marked the child out for
a saint.  He began to love, for their own sakes, church lights, holy
days, all that belonged to the comely order of the sanctuary, the
secrets of its white linen, and holy vessels, and fonts of pure
water; and its hieratic purity and simplicity became the type of
something he desired always to have about him in actual life.  He
pored over the pictures in religious books, and knew by heart the
exact mode in which the wrestling angel grasped Jacob, how Jacob
looked in his mysterious sleep, how the bells and pomegranates were
attached to the hem of Aaron’s vestment, sounding sweetly as he
glided over the turf of the holy place.  His way of conceiving
religion came then to be in effect what it ever afterwards remained–
a sacred history indeed, but still more a sacred ideal, a
transcendent version or representation, under intenser and more
expressive light and shade, of human life and its familiar or
exceptional incidents, birth, death, marriage, [194] youth, age,
tears, joy, rest, sleep, waking–a mirror, towards which men might
turn away their eyes from vanity and dullness, and see themselves
therein as angels, with their daily meat and drink, even, become a
kind of sacred transaction–a complementary strain or burden, applied
to our every-day existence, whereby the stray snatches of music in it
re-set themselves, and fall into the scheme of some higher and more
consistent harmony.  A place adumbrated itself in his thoughts,
wherein those sacred personalities, which are at once the reflex and
the pattern of our nobler phases of life, housed themselves; and this
region in his intellectual scheme all subsequent experience did but
tend still further to realise and define.  Some ideal, hieratic
persons he would always need to occupy it and keep a warmth there.
And he could hardly understand those who felt no such need at all,
finding themselves quite happy without such heavenly companionship,
and sacred double of their life, beside them.
Thus a constant substitution of the typical for the actual took place
in his thoughts.  Angels might be met by the way, under English elm
or beech-tree; mere messengers seemed like angels, bound on celestial
errands; a deep mysticity brooded over real meetings and partings;
marriages were made in heaven; and deaths also, with hands of angels
thereupon, to bear soul and body quietly asunder, each to its [195]
appointed rest.  All the acts and accidents of daily life borrowed a
sacred colour and significance; the very colours of things became
themselves weighty with meanings like the sacred stuffs of Moses’
tabernacle, full of penitence or peace.  Sentiment, congruous in the
first instance only with those divine transactions, the deep,
effusive unction of the House of Bethany, was assumed as the due
attitude for the reception of our every-day existence; and for a time
he walked through the world in a sustained, not unpleasurable awe,
generated by the habitual recognition, beside every circumstance and
event of life, of its celestial correspondent.
Sensibility–the desire of physical beauty–a strange biblical awe,
which made any reference to the unseen act on him like solemn music–
these qualities the child took away with him, when, at about the age
of twelve years, he left the old house, and was taken to live in
another place.  He had never left home before, and, anticipating much
from this change, had long dreamed over it, jealously counting the
days till the time fixed for departure should come; had been a little
careless about others even, in his strong desire for it–when Lewis
fell sick, for instance, and they must wait still two days longer.
At last the morning came, very fine; and all things–the very
pavement with its dust, at the roadside–seemed to have a white,
pearl-like lustre in them.  They were to travel by a [196] favourite
road on which he had often walked a certain distance, and on one of
those two prisoner days, when Lewis was sick, had walked farther than
ever before, in his great desire to reach the new place.  They had
started and gone a little way when a pet bird was found to have been
left behind, and must even now–so it presented itself to him–have
already all the appealing fierceness and wild self-pity at heart of
one left by others to perish of hunger in a closed house; and he
returned to fetch it, himself in hardly less stormy distress.  But as
he passed in search of it from room to room, lying so pale, with a
look of meekness in their denudation, and at last through that
little, stripped white room, the aspect of the place touched him like
the face of one dead; and a clinging back towards it came over him,
so intense that he knew it would last long, and spoiling all his
pleasure in the realisation of a thing so eagerly anticipated.  And
so, with the bird found, but himself in an agony of home-sickness,
thus capriciously sprung up within him, he was driven quickly away,
far into the rural distance, so fondly speculated on, of that
favourite country-road.
172. *Published in Macmillan’s Magazine, Aug. 1878.
Continue...

This is the complete public domain etext “Miscellaneous Studies: A Series of Essays” by Walter Horatio Pater.


Also by this author (on Amazon.com); The Renaissance, Studies in Art and Poetry


This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.

Page last updated on September 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Miscellaneous Studies: A Series of EssaysBy Walter Horatio PaterAt Amazon
