


The Purgatory of Dante is situated on a mountain top on the opposite side
of the earth from Jerusalem, and is surrounded by the western ocean. The
souls of those who go there collect on the banks of the Tiber, and are
taken to the mountain in a boat by an angel pilot. The shores of the
island are covered with the reeds of humility. Around the base of the
mount dwell the souls that, repenting late, must “expiate each year of
deferred penitence with thirty years of deferred Purgatory” unless the
time be shortened by the prayers of their friends on earth. There are
three stages of this Ante-Purgatory: the first, for those who put off
conversion through negligence; the second, for those who died by violence
and repented while dying; the third, for those monarchs who were too much
absorbed in earthly greatness to give much thought to the world to come.
The ascent of the terraces, as also those of Purgatory proper, is very
difficult, and is not allowed to be made after sunset. The gate of St.
Peter separates Ante-Purgatory from Purgatory proper. Three steps, the
first of polished white marble, the second of purple, rough and cracked,
and the third of blood-red porphyry, signifying confession, contrition,
and penance, lead to the gate where sits the angel clad in a penitential
robe, with the gold and silver keys with which to unlock the outer and
inner gates. Purgatory proper consists of seven terraces, in each of which
one of the seven capital sins, Pride, Anger, Sloth, Avarice, Gluttony, and
Lasciviousness are punished; Pride first, because no other sin can be
purged from the body until this deepest sin is eliminated. The soul,
cleansed of these sins, mounts to the terrestrial paradise, which, above
the sphere of air, crowns the Mount of Purgatory.
Continue...

This full text of “National Epics” by Kate Milner Rabb belongs to the public domain.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
