Presented by
Authorama
Public Domain Books


The story of American ships and sailors is an epic of blue water
which seems singularly remote, almost unreal, to the later
generations. A people with a native genius for seafaring won and
held a brilliant supremacy through two centuries and then forsook
this heritage of theirs. The period of achievement was no more
extraordinary than was its swift declension. A maritime race
whose topsails flecked every ocean, whose captains courageous
from father to son had fought with pike and cannonade to defend
the freedom of the seas, turned inland to seek a different
destiny and took no more thought for the tall ships and rich
cargoes which had earned so much renown for its flag.
Vanished fleets and brave memories--a chronicle of America which
had written its closing chapters before the Civil War! There will
be other Yankee merchantmen in times to come, but never days like
those when skippers sailed on seas uncharted in quest of ports
mysterious and unknown.
The Pilgrim Fathers, driven to the northward of their intended
destination in Virginia, landed on the shore of Cape Cod not so
much to clear the forest and till the soil as to establish a
fishing settlement. Like the other Englishmen who long before
1620 had steered across to harvest the cod on the Grand Bank,
they expected to wrest a livelihood mostly from salt water. The
convincing argument in favor of Plymouth was that it offered a
good harbor for boats and was “a place of profitable fishing."
Both pious and amphibious were these pioneers whom the wilderness
and the red Indian confined to the water’s edge, where they were
soon building ships to trade corn for beaver skins with the
Kennebec colony.
Even more energetic in taking profit from the sea were the
Puritans who came to Massachusetts Bay in 1629, bringing
carpenters and shipbuilders with them to hew the pine and oak so
close at hand into keelsons, frames, and planking. Two years
later, Governor John Winthrop launched his thirty-ton sloop
Blessing of the Bay, and sent her to open “friendly commercial
relations” with the Dutch of Manhattan. Brisk though the traffic
was in furs and wampum, these mariners of Boston and Salem were
not content to voyage coastwise. Offshore fishing made skilled,
adventurous seamen of them, and what they caught with hook and
line, when dried and salted, was readily exchanged for other
merchandise in Bermuda, Barbados, and Europe.
A vessel was a community venture, and the custom still survives
in the ancient ports of the Maine coast where the shapely wooden
schooners are fashioned. The blacksmith, the rigger, the calker,
took their pay in shares. They became part owners, as did
likewise the merchant who supplied stores and material; and when
the ship was afloat, the master, the mates, and even the seamen,
were allowed cargo space for commodities which they might buy and
sell to their own advantage. Thus early they learned to trade as
shrewdly as they navigated, and every voyage directly concerned a
whole neighborhood.
This kind of enterprise was peculiar to New England because other
resources were lacking. To the westward the French were more
interested in exploring the rivers leading to the region of the
Great Lakes and in finding fabulous rewards in furs. The Dutch on
the Hudson were similarly engaged by means of the western trails
to the country of the Iroquois, while the planters of Virginia
had discovered an easy opulence in the tobacco crop, with slave
labor to toil for them, and they were not compelled to turn to
the hardships and the hazards of the sea. The New Englander,
hampered by an unfriendly climate, hard put to it to grow
sufficient food, with land immensely difficult to clear, was
between the devil and the deep sea, and he sagaciously chose the
latter. Elsewhere in the colonies the forest was an enemy to be
destroyed with infinite pains. The New England pioneer regarded
it with favor as the stuff with which to make stout ships and
step the straight masts in them.
And so it befell that the seventeenth century had not run its
course before New England was hardily afloat on every Atlantic
trade route, causing Sir Josiah Child, British merchant and
economist, to lament in 1668 that in his opinion nothing was
"more prejudicial and in prospect more dangerous to any mother
kingdom than the increase of shipping in her colonies,
plantations, or provinces.”
This absorbing business of building wooden vessels was scattered
in almost every bay and river of the indented coast from Nova
Scotia to Buzzard’s Bay and the sheltered waters of Long Island
Sound. It was not restricted, as now, to well-equipped yards with
crews of trained artisans. Hard by the huddled hamlet of log
houses was the row of keel-blocks sloping to the tide. In winter
weather too rough for fishing, when the little farms lay idle,
this Yankee Jack-of-all-trades plied his axe and adze to shape
the timbers, and it was a routine task to peg together a sloop, a
ketch, or a brig, mere cockleshells, in which to fare forth to
London, or Cadiz, or the Windward Islands--some of them not much
larger and far less seaworthy than the lifeboat which hangs at a
liner’s davits. Pinching poverty forced him to dispense with the
ornate, top-heavy cabins and forecastles of the foreign
merchantmen, while invention, bred of necessity, molded finer
lines and less clumsy models to weather the risks of a stormy
coast and channels beset with shoals and ledges. The square-rig
did well enough for deepwater voyages, but it was an awkward,
lubberly contrivance for working along shore, and the colonial
Yankee therefore evolved the schooner with her flat fore-and-aft
sails which enabled her to beat to windward and which required
fewer men in the handling.
Dimly but unmistakably these canny seafarers in their rude
beginnings foreshadowed the creation of a merchant marine which
should one day comprise the noblest, swiftest ships driven by the
wind and the finest sailors that ever trod a deck. Even then
these early vessels were conspicuously efficient, carrying
smaller crews than the Dutch or English, paring expenses to a
closer margin, daring to go wherever commerce beckoned in order
to gain a dollar at peril of their skins.
By the end of the seventeenth century more than a thousand
vessels were registered as built in the New England colonies, and
Salem already displayed the peculiar talent for maritime
adventure which was to make her the most illustrious port of the
New World. The first of her line of shipping merchants was Philip
English, who was sailing his own ketch Speedwell in 1676 and so
rapidly advanced his fortunes that in a few years he was the
richest man on the coast, with twenty-one vessels which traded
coastwise with Virginia and offshore with Bilbao, Barbados, St.
Christopher’s, and France. Very devout were his bills of lading,
flavored in this manner: “Twenty hogsheads of salt, shipped by
the Grace of God in the good sloop called the Mayflower . . . .
and by God’s Grace bound to Virginia or Merriland.”
No less devout were the merchants who ordered their skippers to
cross to the coast of Guinea and fill the hold with negroes to be
sold in the West Indies before returning with sugar and molasses
to Boston or Rhode Island. The slave-trade flourished from the
very birth of commerce in Puritan New England and its golden
gains and exotic voyages allured high-hearted lads from farm and
counter. In 1640 the ship Desire, built at Marblehead, returned
from the West Indies and “brought some cotton and tobacco and
negroes, etc. from thence.” Earlier than this the Dutch of
Manhattan had employed black labor, and it was provided that the
Incorporated West India Company should “allot to each Patroon
twelve black men and women out of the Prizes in which Negroes
should be found.”
It was in the South, however, that this kind of labor was most
needed and, as the trade increased, Virginia and the Carolinas
became the most lucrative markets. Newport and Bristol drove a
roaring traffic in “rum and niggers,” with a hundred sail to be
found in the infamous Middle Passage. The master of one of these
Rhode Island slavers, writing home from Guinea in 1736, portrayed
the congestion of the trade in this wise: “For never was there so
much Rum on the Coast at one time before. Not ye like of ye
French ships was never seen before, for ye whole coast is full of
them. For my part I can give no guess when I shall get away, for
I purchast but 27 slaves since I have been here, for slaves is
very scarce. We have had nineteen Sail of us at one time in ye
Road, so that ships that used to carry pryme slaves off is now
forced to take any that comes. Here is seven sail of us Rum men
that are ready to devour one another, for our case is desprit.”
Two hundred years of wickedness unspeakable and human torture
beyond all computation, justified by Christian men and sanctioned
by governments, at length rending the nation asunder in civil war
and bequeathing a problem still unsolved--all this followed in
the wake of those first voyages in search of labor which could be
bought and sold as merchandise. It belonged to the dark ages with
piracy and witchcraft, better forgotten than recalled, save for
its potent influence in schooling brave seamen and building
faster ships for peace and war.
These colonial seamen, in truth, fought for survival amid dangers
so manifold as to make their hardihood astounding. It was not
merely a matter of small vessels with a few men and boys daring
distant voyages and the mischances of foundering or stranding,
but of facing an incessant plague of privateers, French and
Spanish, Dutch and English, or a swarm of freebooters under no
flag at all. Coasts were unlighted, charts few and unreliable,
and the instruments of navigation almost as crude as in the days
of Columbus. Even the savage Indian, not content with lurking in
ambush, went afloat to wreak mischief, and the records of the
First Church of Salem contain this quaint entry under date of
July 25, 1677: “The Lord having given a Commission to the Indians
to take no less than 13 of the Fishing Ketches of Salem and
Captivate the men . . . it struck a great consternation into all
the people here. The Pastor moved on the Lord’s Day, and the
whole people readily consented, to keep the Lecture Day following
as a Fast Day, which was accordingly done . . . . The Lord was
pleased to send in some of the Ketches on the Fast Day which was
looked on as a gracious smile of Providence. Also there had been
19 wounded men sent into Salem a little while before; also a
Ketch sent out from Salem as a man-of-war to recover the rest of
the Ketches. The Lord give them Good Success.”
To encounter a pirate craft was an episode almost commonplace and
often more sordid than picturesque. Many of these sea rogues were
thieves with small stomach for cutlasses and slaughter. They were
of the sort that overtook Captain John Shattuck sailing home from
Jamaica in 1718 when he reported his capture by one Captain
Charles Vain, “a Pyrat” of 12 guns and 120 men who took him to
Crooked Island, plundered him of various articles, stripped the
brig, abused the crew, and finally let him go. In the same year
the seamen of the Hopewell related that near Hispaniola they met
with pirates who robbed and ill-treated them and carried off
their mate because they had no navigator.
Ned Low, a gentleman rover of considerable notoriety, stooped to
filch the stores and gear from a fleet of fourteen poor fishermen
of Cape Sable. He had a sense of dramatic values, however, and
frequently brandished his pistols on deck, besides which, as set
down by one of his prisoners, “he had a young child in Boston for
whom he entertained such tenderness that on every lucid interval
from drinking and revelling, I have seen him sit down and weep
plentifully.”
A more satisfying figure was Thomas Pounds, who was taken by the
sloop Mary, sent after him from Boston in 1689. He was discovered
in Vineyard Sound, and the two vessels fought a gallant action,
the pirate flying a red flag and refusing to strike. Captain
Samuel Pease of the Mary was mortally wounded, while Pounds, this
proper pirate, strode his quarter-deck and waved his naked sword,
crying, “Come on board, ye dogs, and I will strike YOU
presently.” This invitation was promptly accepted by the stout
seamen from Boston, who thereupon swarmed over the bulwark and
drove all hands below, preserving Thomas Pounds to be hanged in
public.
In 1703 John Quelch, a man of resource, hoisted what he called
"Old Roger” over the Charles--a brigantine which had been
equipped as a privateer to cruise against the French of Acadia.
This curious flag of his was described as displaying a skeleton
with an hour-glass in one hand and “a dart in the heart with
three drops of blood proceeding from it in the other.” Quelch led
a mutiny, tossed the skipper overboard, and sailed for Brazil,
capturing several merchantmen on the way and looting them of rum,
silks, sugar, gold dust, and munitions. Rashly he came sailing
back to Marblehead, primed with a plausible yarn, but his men
talked too much when drunk and all hands were jailed. Upon the
gallows Quelch behaved exceedingly well, “pulling off his hat and
bowing to the spectators,” while the somber Puritan merchants in
the crowd were, many of them, quietly dealing in the merchandise
fetched home by pirates who were lucky enough to steer clear of
the law.
This was a shady industry in which New York took the more active
part, sending out supplies to the horde of pirates who ravaged
the waters of the Far East and made their haven at Madagascar,
and disposing of the booty received in exchange. Governor
Fletcher had dirtied his hands by protecting this commerce and,
as a result, Lord Bellomont was named to succeed him. Said
William III, “I send you, my Lord, to New York, because an honest
and intrepid man is wanted to put these abuses down, and because
I believe you to be such a man.”
Such were the circumstances in which Captain William Kidd,
respectable master mariner in the merchant service, was employed
by Lord Bellomont, royal Governor of New York, New Hampshire, and
Massachusetts, to command an armed ship and harry the pirates of
the West Indies and Madagascar. Strangest of all the sea tales of
colonial history is that of Captain Kidd and his cruise in the
Adventure-Galley. His name is reddened with crimes never
committed, his grisly phantom has stalked through the legends
and literature of piracy, and the Kidd tradition still has magic
to set treasure-seekers exploring almost every beach, cove, and
headland from Halifax to the Gulf of Mexico. Yet if truth were
told, he never cut a throat or made a victim walk the plank. He
was tried and hanged for the trivial offense of breaking the head
of a mutinous gunner of his own crew with a wooden bucket. It was
even a matter of grave legal doubt whether he had committed one
single piratical act. His trial in London was a farce. In the
case of the captured ships he alleged that they were sailing
under French passes, and he protested that his privateering
commission justified him, and this contention was not disproven.
The suspicion is not wanting that he was condemned as a scapegoat
because certain noblemen of England had subscribed the capital to
outfit his cruise, expecting to win rich dividends in gold
captured from the pirates he was sent to attack. Against these
men a political outcry was raised, and as a result Captain Kidd
was sacrificed. He was a seaman who had earned honorable
distinction in earlier years, and fate has played his memory a
shabby trick.
It was otherwise with Blackbeard, most flamboyant of all colonial
pirates, who filled the stage with swaggering success, chewing
wine-glasses in his cabin, burning sulphur to make his ship seem
more like hell, and industriously scourging the whole Atlantic
coast. Charleston lived in terror of him until Lieutenant
Maynard, in a small sloop, laid him alongside in a
hammer-and-tongs engagement and cut off the head of Blackbeard to
dangle from the bowsprit as a trophy.
Of this rudely adventurous era, it would be hard to find a seaman
more typical than the redoubtable Sir William Phips who became
the first royal Governor of the Massachusetts Colony in 1692.
Born on a frontier farm of the Maine coast while many of the
Pilgrim fathers were living, “his faithful mother,” wrote Cotton
Mather, “had no less than twenty-six children, whereof twenty-one
were sons; but equivalent to them all was William, one of the
youngest, whom, his father dying, was left young with his mother,
and with her he lived, keeping ye sheep in Ye Wilderness until he
was eighteen years old.” Then he apprenticed himself to a
neighboring shipwright who was building sloops and pinnaces and,
having learned the trade, set out for Boston. As a ship-carpenter
he plied his trade, spent his wages in the taverns of the
waterside and there picked up wondrous yarns of the silver-laden
galleons of Spain which had shivered their timbers on the reefs
of the Bahama Passage or gone down in the hurricanes that beset
those southerly seas. Meantime he had married a wealthy widow
whose property enabled him to go treasure-hunting on the Spanish
main. From his first voyage thither in a small vessel he escaped
with his life and barely enough treasure to pay the cost of the
expedition.
In no wise daunted he laid his plans to search for a richly
ladened galleon which was said to have been wrecked half a
century before off the coast of Hispaniola. Since his own funds
were not sufficient for this exploit, he betook himself to
England to enlist the aid of the Government. With bulldog
persistence he besieged the court of James II for a whole year,
this rough-and-ready New England shipmaster, until he was given a
royal frigate for his purpose. He failed to fish up more silver
from the sands but, nothing daunted, he persuaded other patrons
to outfit him with a small merchantman, the James and Mary, in
which he sailed for the coast of Hispaniola. This time he found
his galleon and thirty-two tons of silver. “Besides that
incredible treasure of plate, thus fetched up from seven or eight
fathoms under water, there were vast riches of Gold, and Pearls,
and Jewels . . . . All that a Spanish frigot was to be enriched
withal.”
Up the Thames sailed the lucky little merchantman in the year of
1687, with three hundred thousand pounds sterling as her
freightage of treasure. Captain Phips made honest division with
his backers and, because men of his integrity were not over
plentiful in England after the Restoration, King James knighted
him. He sailed home to Boston, “a man of strong and sturdy
frame,” as Hawthorne fancied him, “whose face had been roughened
by northern tempests and blackened by the burning sun of the West
Indies . . . . He wears an immense periwig flowing down over his
shoulders . . . . His red, rough hands which have done many a
good day’s work with the hammer and adze are half-covered by the
delicate lace rues at the wrist.” But he carried with him the
manners of the forecastle, a man hasty and unlettered but
superbly brave and honest. Even after he had become Governor he
thrashed the captain of the Nonesuch frigate of the royal navy,
and used his fists on the Collector of the Port after cursing him
with tremendous gusto. Such behavior in a Governor was too
strenuous, and Sir William Phips was summoned to England, where
he died while waiting his restoration to office and royal favor.
Failing both, he dreamed of still another treasure voyage, “for
it was his purpose, upon his dismission from his Government once
more to have gone upon his old Fishing-Trade, upon a mighty shelf
of rock and banks of sand that lie where he had informed
himself.”
The wars of England with France and Spain spread turmoil upon the
high seas during the greater part of the eighteenth century. Yet
with an immense tenacity of purpose, these briny forefathers
increased their trade and multiplied their ships in the face of
every manner of adversity. The surprising fact is that most of
them were not driven ashore to earn their bread. What Daniel
Webster said of them at a later day was true from the beginning:
"It is not, sir, by protection and bounties, but by unwearied
exertion, by extreme economy, by that manly and resolute spirit
which relies on itself to protect itself. These causes alone
enable American ships still to keep the element and show the flag
of their country in distant seas.”
What was likely to befall a shipmaster in the turbulent
eighteenth century may be inferred from the misfortunes of
Captain Michael Driver of Salem. In 1759 he was in command of the
schooner Three Brothers, bound to the West Indies on his lawful
business. Jogging along with a cargo of fish and lumber, he was
taken by a privateer under British colors and sent into Antigua
as a prize. Unable to regain either his schooner or his two
thousand dollar cargo, he sadly took passage for home. Another
owner gave him employment and he set sail in the schooner Betsy
for Guadaloupe. During this voyage, poor man, he was captured and
carried into port by a French privateer. On the suggestion that
he might ransom his vessel on payment of four thousand livres, he
departed for Boston in hope of finding the money, leaving behind
three of his sailors as hostages.
Cash in hand for the ransom, the long-suffering Captain Michael
Driver turned southward again, now in the schooner Mary, and he
flew a flag of truce to indicate his errand. This meant nothing
to the ruffian who commanded the English privateer Revenge. He
violently seized the innocent Mary and sent her into New
Providence. Here Captain Driver made lawful protest before the
authorities, and was set at liberty with vessel and cargo--an act
of justice quite unusual in the Admiralty Court of the Bahamas.
Unmolested, the harassed skipper managed to gain Cape Francois
and rescue his three seamen and his schooner in exchange for the
ransom money. As he was about to depart homeward bound, a French
frigate snatched him and his crew out of their vessel and threw
them ashore at Santiago, where for two months they existed as
ragged beachcombers until by some judicial twist the schooner was
returned to them. They worked her home and presented their long
list of grievances to the colonial Government of Massachusetts,
which duly forwarded them--and that was the end of it. Three
years had been spent in this catalogue of misadventures, and
Captain Driver, his owners, and his men were helpless against
such intolerable aggression. They and their kind were a prey to
every scurvy rascal who misused a privateering commission to fill
his own pockets.
Stoutly resolved to sail and trade as they pleased, these
undaunted Americans, nevertheless, increased their business on
blue water until shortly before the Revolution the New England
fleet alone numbered six hundred sail. Its captains felt at home
in Surinam and the Canaries. They trimmed their yards in the
reaches of the Mediterranean and the North Sea or bargained
thriftily in the Levant. The whalers of Nantucket, in their
apple-bowed barks, explored and hunted in distant seas, and the
smoke of their try-pots darkened the waters of Baffin Bay,
Guinea, and Brazil. It was they who inspired Edmund Burke’s
familiar eulogy: “No sea but is vexed by their fisheries. No
climate that is not a witness to their toils. Neither the
perseverance of Holland nor the activity of France, nor the
dexterous and firm sagacity of England ever carried this most
perilous mode of hardy industry to the extent to which it has
been pushed by this recent people--a people who are still, as it
were, but in the gristle and not yet hardened into the bone of
manhood.”
In 1762, seventy-eight whalers cleared from American ports, of
which more than half were from Nantucket. Eight years later there
were one hundred and twenty-five whalers out of Nantucket which
took 14,331 barrels of oil valued at $358,200. In size these
vessels averaged no more than ninety tons, a fishing smack of
today, and yet they battered their way half around the watery
globe and comfortably supported six thousand people who dwelt on
a sandy island unfit for farming and having no other industries.
Every Nantucket lad sailed for his “lay” or share of the catch
and aspired to command eventually a whaler of his own.
Whaler, merchantman, and slaver were training a host of
incomparable seamen destined to harry the commerce of England
under the new-born Stars and Stripes, and now, in 1775, on the
brink of actual war, Parliament flung a final provocation and
aroused the furious enmity of the fishermen who thronged the
Grand Bank. Lord North proposed to forbid the colonies to export
fish to those foreign markets in which every seacoast village was
vitally concerned, and he also contemplated driving the fishing
fleets from their haunts off Newfoundland. This was to rob six
thousand sturdy men of a livelihood afloat and to spread ruin
among the busy ports, such as Marblehead and Gloucester, from
which sailed hundreds of pinks, snows, and schooners. This
measure became law notwithstanding the protests of twenty-one
peers of the realm who declared: “We dissent because the attempt
to coerce by famine the whole body of the inhabitants of great
and populous provinces is without example in the history of this,
or perhaps, of any civilized nation.”
The sailormen bothered their heads very little about taxation
without representation but whetted their anger with grudges more
robust. They had been beggared and bullied and shot at from the
Bay of Biscay to Barbados, and no sooner was the Continental
Congress ready to issue privateering commissions and letters of
marque than for them it was up anchor and away to bag a
Britisher. Scarcely had a shipmaster signaled his arrival with a
deep freight of logwood, molasses, or sugar than he received
orders to discharge with all speed and clear his decks for
mounting heavier batteries and slinging the hammocks of a hundred
eager privateersmen who had signed articles in the tavern
rendezvous. The timbered warehouses were filled with long-toms
and nine-pounders, muskets, blunderbusses, pistols, cutlases,
boarding-pikes, hand grenades, tomahawks, grape, canister, and
doubleheaded shot.
In the narrow, gabled streets of Salem, Boston, New York, and
Baltimore, crowds trooped after the fifes and drums with a
strapping recruiting officer to enroll “all gentlemen seamen and
able-bodied landsmen who had a mind to distinguish themselves in
the glorious cause of their country and make their fortunes."
Many a ship’s company was mustered between noon and sunset,
including men who had served in armed merchantmen and who in
times of nominal peace had fought the marauders of Europe or
whipped the corsairs of Barbary in the Strait of Gibraltar. Never
was a race of seamen so admirably fitted for the daring trade of
privateering as the crews of these tall sloops, topsail
schooners, and smart square-riggers, their sides checkered with
gun-ports, and ready to drive to sea like hawks.
In some instances the assurance of these hardy men was both
absurd and sublime. Ramshackle boats with twenty or thirty men
aboard, mounting one or two old guns, sallied out in the
expectation of gold and glory, only to be captured by the first
British cruiser that chanced to sight them. A few even sailed
with no cannon at all, confident of taking them out of the first
prize overhauled by laying alongside--and so in some cases they
actually did.
The privateersmen of the Revolution played a larger part in
winning the war than has been commonly recognized. This fact,
however, was clearly perceived by Englishmen of that era, as “The
London Spectator” candidly admitted: “The books at Lloyds will
recount it, and the rate of assurances at that time will prove
what their diminutive strength was able to effect in the face of
our navy, and that when nearly one hundred pennants were flying
on our coast. Were we able to prevent their going in and out, or
stop them from taking our trade and our storeships even in sight
of our garrisons? Besides, were they not in the English and Irish
Channels, picking up our homeward bound trade, sending their
prizes into French and Spanish ports to the great terror of our
merchants and shipowners?”
The naval forces of the Thirteen Colonies were pitifully feeble
in comparison with the mighty fleets of the enemy whose flaming
broadsides upheld the ancient doctrine that “the Monarchs of
Great Britain have a peculiar and Sovereign authority upon the
Ocean . . . from the Laws of God and of Nature, besides an
uninterrupted Fruition of it for so many Ages past as that its
Beginnings cannot be traced out."*
* “The Seaman’s Vade-Mecum.” London, 1744.
In 1776 only thirty-one Continental cruisers of all classes were
in commission, and this number was swiftly diminished by capture
and blockade until in 1782 no more than seven ships flew the flag
of the American Navy. On the other hand, at the close of 1777,
one hundred and seventy-four private armed vessels had been
commissioned, mounting two thousand guns and carrying nine
thousand men. During this brief period of the war they took as
prizes 733 British merchantmen and inflicted losses of more than
two million pounds sterling. Over ten thousand seamen were made
prisoners at a time when England sorely needed them for drafting
into her navy. To lose them was a far more serious matter than
for General Washington to capture as many Hessian mercenaries who
could be replaced by purchase.
In some respects privateering as waged a century and more ago was
a sordid, unlovely business, the ruling motive being rather a
greed of gain than an ardent love of country. Shares in lucky
ships were bought and sold in the gambling spirit of a stock
exchange. Fortunes were won and lost regardless of the public
service. It became almost impossible to recruit men for the navy
because they preferred the chance of booty in a privateer. For
instance, the State of Massachusetts bought a twenty-gun ship,
the Protector, as a contribution to the naval strength, and one
of her crew, Ebenezer Fox, wrote of the effort to enlist
sufficient men: “The recruiting business went on slowly, however,
but at length upwards of three hundred men were carried, dragged,
and driven abroad; of all ages, kinds, and descriptions; in all
the various stages of intoxication from that of sober tipsiness
to beastly drunkenness; with the uproar and clamor that may be
more easily imagined than described. Such a motley group has
never been seen since Falstaff’s ragged regiment paraded the
streets of Coventry.”
There was nothing of glory to boast of in fetching into port some
little Nova Scotia coasting schooner with a cargo of deals and
potatoes, whose master was also the owner and who lost the
savings of a lifetime because he lacked the men and guns to
defend his property against spoliation. The war was no concern of
his, and he was the victim of a system now obsolete among
civilized nations, a relic of a barbarous and piratical age whose
spirit has been revived and gloried in recently only by the
Government of the German Empire. The chief fault of the
privateersman was that he sailed and fought for his own gain, but
he was never guilty of sinking ships with passengers and crew
aboard, and very often he played the gentleman in gallant style.
Nothing could have seemed to him more abhorrent and incredible
than a kind of warfare which should drown women and children
because they had embarked under an enemy’s flag.
Extraordinary as were the successes of the Yankee privateers, it
was a game of give-and-take, a weapon which cut both ways, and
the temptation is to extol their audacious achievements while
glossing over the heavy losses which their own merchant marine
suffered. The weakness of privateering was that it was wholly
offensive and could not, like a strong navy, protect its own
commerce from depredation. While the Americans were capturing
over seven hundred British vessels during the first two years of
the war, as many as nine hundred American ships were taken or
sunk by the enemy, a rate of destruction which fairly swept the
Stars and Stripes from the tracks of ocean commerce. As prizes
these vessels were sold at Liverpool and London for an average
amount of two thousand pounds each and the loss to the American
owners was, of course, ever so much larger.
The fact remains, nevertheless--and it is a brilliant page of
history to recall--that in an inchoate nation without a navy,
with blockading squadrons sealing most of its ports, with ragged
armies on land which retreated oftener than they fought, private
armed ships dealt the maritime prestige of Great Britain a far
deadlier blow than the Dutch, French, and Spanish were able to
inflict. In England, there resulted actual distress, even lack of
food, because these intrepid seamen could not be driven away from
her own coasts and continued to snatch their prizes from under
the guns of British forts and fleets. The plight of the West
India Colonies was even worse, as witness this letter from a
merchant of Grenada: “We are happy if we can get anything for
money by reason of the quantity of vessels taken by the
Americans. A fleet of vessels came from Ireland a few days ago.
From sixty vessels that departed from Ireland not above
twenty-five arrived in this and neighboring islands, the others,
it is thought, being all taken by American privateers. God knows,
if this American war continues much longer, we shall all die of
hunger.”
On both sides, by far the greater number of captures was made
during the earlier period of the war which cleared the seas of
the smaller, slower, and unarmed vessels. As the war progressed
and the profits flowed in, swifter and larger ships were built
for the special business of privateering until the game resembled
actual naval warfare. Whereas, at first, craft of ten guns with
forty or fifty men had been considered adequate for the service,
three or four years later ships were afloat with a score of heavy
cannon and a trained crew of a hundred and fifty or two hundred
men, ready to engage a sloop of war or to stand up to the enemy’s
largest privateers. In those days single ship actions, now almost
forgotten in naval tactics, were fought with illustrious skill
and courage, and commanders won victories worthy of comparison
with deeds distinguished in the annals of the American Navy.
Salem was the foremost privateering port of the Revolution, and
from this pleasant harbor, long since deserted by ships and
sailormen, there filled away past Cape Ann one hundred and
fifty-eight vessels of all sizes to scan the horizon for British
topsails. They accounted for four hundred prizes, or half the
whole number to the credit of American arms afloat. This
preeminence was due partly to freedom from a close blockade and
partly to a seafaring population which was born and bred to its
trade and knew no other. Besides the crews of Salem merchantmen,
privateering enlisted the idle fishermen of ports nearby and the
mariners of Boston whose commerce had been snuffed out by the
British occupation. Philadelphia, Baltimore, and Charleston sent
some splendid armed ships to sea but not with the impetuous rush
nor in anything like the numbers enrolled by this gray old town
whose fame was unique.
For the most part, the records of all these brave ships and the
thousands of men who sailed and sweated and fought in them are
dim and scanty, no more than routine entries in dusty log-books
which read like this: “Filled away in pursuit of a second sail in
the N. W. At 4.30 she hoisted English colors and commenced firing
her stern guns. At 5.90 took in the steering sails, at the same
time she fired a broadside. We opened a fire from our larboard
battery and at 5.30 she struck her colors. Got out the boats and
boarded her. She proved to be the British brig Acorn from
Liverpool to Rio Janeiro, mounting fourteen cannon."* But now and
then one finds in these old sea-journals an entry more intimate
and human, such as the complaint of the master of the privateer
Scorpion, cruising in 1778 and never a prize in sight. “This Book
I made to keep the Accounts of my Voyage but God knows beste what
that will be, for I am at this time very Impashent but I hope
soon there will be a Change to ease my Trubled Mind. On this Day
I was Chaced by Two Ships of War which I tuck to be Enemies, but
coming on thick Weather I have lost site of them and so conclude
myself escaped which is a small good Fortune in the midste of my
Discouragements."** A burst of gusty laughter still echoes along
the crowded deck of the letter-of-marque schooner Success, whose
master, Captain Philip Thrash, inserted this diverting comment in
his humdrum record of the day’s work: “At one half past 8
discovered a sail ahead. Tacked ship. At 9 tacked ship again and
past just to Leeward of the Sail which appeared to be a damn’d
Comical Boat, by G-d.”
* From the manuscript collections of the Essex Institute, Salem,
Mass.
** From the manuscript collections of the Essex Institute, Salem,
Mass.
There are a few figures of the time and place which stand out,
full-length, in vivid colors against a background that satisfies
the desire of romance and thrillingly conveys the spirit of the
time and the place. Such a one was Captain Jonathan Haraden,
Salem privateersman, who captured one thousand British cannon
afloat and is worthy to be ranked as one of the ablest
sea-fighters of his generation. He was a merchant mariner, a
master at the outbreak of the Revolution, who had followed the
sea since boyhood. But it was more to his taste to command the
Salem ship General Pickering of 180 tons which was fitted out
under a letter of marque in the spring of 1780. She carried
fourteen six-pounders and forty-five men and boys, nothing very
formidable, when Captain Haraden sailed for Bilbao with a cargo
of sugar. During the voyage, before his crew had been hammered
into shape, he beat off a British privateer of twenty guns and
safely tacked into the Bay of Biscay.
There he sighted another hostile privateer, the Golden Eagle,
larger than his own ship. Instead of shifting his course to avoid
her, Haraden clapped on sail and steered alongside after
nightfall, roaring through his trumpet: “What ship is this? An
American frigate, sir. Strike, or I’ll sink you with a
broadside.”
Dazed by this unexpected summons in the gloom, the master of the
Golden Eagle promptly surrendered, and a prize crew was thrown
aboard with orders to follow the Pickering into Bilbao. While
just outside that Spanish harbor, a strange sail was descried and
again Jonathan Haraden cleared for action. The vessel turned out
to be the Achilles, one of the most powerful privateers out of
London, with forty guns and a hundred and fifty men, or almost
thrice the fighting strength of the little Pickering. She was, in
fact, more like a sloop of war. Before Captain Haraden could haul
within gunshot to protect his prize, it had been recaptured by
the Achilles, which then maneuvered to engage the Pickering.
Darkness intervened, but Jonathan Haraden had no idea of escaping
under cover of it. He was waiting for the morning breeze and a
chance to fight it out to a finish. He was a handsome man with an
air of serene composure and a touch of the theatrical such as
Nelson displayed in his great moments. Having prepared his ship
for battle, he slept soundly until dawn and then dressed with
fastidious care to stroll on deck, where he beheld the Achilles
bearing down on him with her crew at quarters.
His own men were clustered behind their open ports, matches
lighted, tackles and breechings cast off, crowbars, handspikes,
and sponge-staves in place, gunners stripped to the waist,
powder-boys ready for the word like sprinters on the mark.
Forty-five of them against a hundred and fifty, and Captain
Haraden, debonair, unruffled, walking to and fro with a leisurely
demeanor, remarking that although the Achilles appeared to be
superior in force, “he had no doubt they would beat her if they
were firm and steady and did not throw away their fire.”
It was, indeed, a memorable sea-picture, the sturdy Pickering
riding deep with her burden of sugar and seeming smaller than she
really was, the Achilles towering like a frigate, and all Bilbao
turned out to watch the duel, shore and headlands crowded with
spectators, the blue harbor-mouth gay with an immense flotilla of
fishing boats and pleasure craft. The stake for which Haraden
fought was to retake the Golden Eagle prize and to gain his port.
His seamanship was flawless. Vastly outnumbered if it should come
to boarding, he handled his vessel so as to avoid the Achilles
while he poured the broadsides into her. After two hours the
London privateer emerged from the smoke which had obscured the
combat and put out to sea in flight, hulled through and through,
while a farewell flight of crowbars, with which the guns of the
Pickering had been crammed to the muzzle, ripped through her
sails and rigging.
Haraden hoisted canvas and drove in chase, but the Achilles had
the heels of him “with a mainsail as large as a ship of the
line,” and reluctantly he wore ship and, with the Golden Eagle
again in his possession, he sailed to an anchorage in Bilbao
harbor. The Spanish populace welcomed him with tremendous
enthusiasm. He was carried through the streets in a holiday
procession and was the hero of banquets and public receptions.
Such a man was bound to be the idol of his sailors and one of
them quite plausibly related that “so great was the confidence he
inspired that if he but looked at a sail through his glass and
told the helmsman to steer for her, the observation went
round,’If she is an enemy, she is ours.’”
It was in this same General Pickering, no longer sugar-laden but
in cruising trim, that Jonathan Haraden accomplished a feat which
Paul Jones might have been proud to claim. There lifted above the
sky-line three armed merchantmen sailing in company from Halifax
to New York, a brig of fourteen guns, a ship of sixteen guns, a
sloop of twelve guns. When they flew signals and formed in line,
the ship alone appeared to outmatch the Pickering, but Haraden,
in that lordly manner of his, assured his men that “he had no
doubt whatever that if they would do their duty he would quickly
capture the three vessels.” Here was performance very much out of
the ordinary, naval strategy of an exceptionally high order, and
yet it is dismissed by the only witness who took the trouble to
mention it in these few, casual words: “This he did with great
ease by going alongside of each of them, one after the other.”
One more story of this master sea-rover of the Revolution, sailor
and gentleman, who served his country so much more brilliantly
than many a landsman lauded in the written histories of the war.
While in the Pickering he attacked a heavily armed royal mail
packet bound to England from the West Indies, one of the largest
merchant vessels of her day and equipped to defend herself
against privateers. A tough antagonist and a hard nut to crack!
They battered each other like two pugilists for four hours and
even then the decision was still in the balance. Then Haraden
sheered off to mend his damaged gear and splintered hull before
closing in again.
He then discovered that all his powder had been shot away
excepting one last charge. Instead of calling it a drawn battle,
he rammed home this last shot in the locker, and ran down to
windward of the packet, so close that he could shout across to
the other quarter-deck: “I will give you five minutes to haul
down your colors. If they are not down at the end of that time, I
will fire into you and sink you, so help me God.”
It was the bluff magnificent--courage cold-blooded and
calculating. The adversary was still unbeaten. Haraden stood with
watch in hand and sonorously counted off the minutes. It was the
stronger will and not the heavier metal that won the day. To be
shattered by fresh broadsides at pistol-range was too much for
the nerves of the gallant English skipper whose decks were
already like a slaughterhouse. One by one, Haraden shouted the
minutes and his gunners blew their matches. At “four” the red
ensign came fluttering down and the mail packet was a prize of
war.
Another merchant seaman of this muster-roll of patriots was Silas
Talbot, who took to salt water as a cabin boy at the age of
twelve and was a prosperous shipmaster at twenty-one with savings
invested in a house of his own in Providence. Enlisting under
Washington, he was made a captain of infantry and was soon
promoted, but he was restless ashore and glad to obtain an odd
assignment. As Colonel Talbot he selected sixty infantry
volunteers, most of them seamen by trade, and led them aboard the
small sloop Argo in May, 1779, to punish the New York Tories who
were equipping privateers against their own countrymen and
working great mischief in Long Island Sound. So serious was the
situation that General Gates found it almost impossible to obtain
food supplies for the northern department of the Continental
army.
Silas Talbot and his nautical infantrymen promptly fell in with
the New York privateer Lively, a fair match for him, and as
promptly sent her into port. He then ran offshore and picked up
and carried into Boston two English privateers headed for New
York with large cargoes of merchandise from the West Indies. But
he was particularly anxious to square accounts with a renegade
Captain Hazard who made Newport his base and had captured many
American vessels with the stout brig King George, using her for
"the base purpose of plundering his old neighbors and friends.”
On his second cruise in the Argo, young Silas Talbot encountered
the perfidious King George to the southward of Long Island and
riddled her with one broadside after another, first hailing
Captain Hazard by name and cursing him in double-shotted phrases
for the traitorous swab that he was. Then the seagoing infantry
scrambled over the bulwarks and tumbled the Tories down their own
hatches without losing a man. A prize crew with the humiliated
King George made for New London, where there was much cheering in
the port, and “even the women, both young and old, expressed the
greatest joy.”
With no very heavy fighting, Talbot had captured five vessels and
was keen to show what his crew could do against mettlesome
foemen. He found them at last well out to sea in a large ship
which seemed eager to engage him. Only a few hundred feet apart
through a long afternoon, they briskly and cheerily belabored
each other with grape and solid shot. Talbot’s speaking-trumpet
was shot out of his hand, the tails of his coat were shorn off,
and all the officers and men stationed with him on the
quarter-deck were killed or wounded.
His crew reported that the Argo was in a sinking condition, with
the water flooding the gun-deck, but he told them to lower a man
or two in the bight of a line and they pluckily plugged the holes
from overside. There was a lusty huzza when the Englishman’s
mainmast crashed to the deck and this finished the affair. Silas
Talbot found that he had trounced the privateer Dragon, of twice
his own tonnage and with the advantage in both guns and men.
While his crew was patching the Argo and pumping the water from
her hold, the lookout yelled that another sail was making for
them. Without hesitation Talbot somehow got this absurdly
impudent one-masted craft of his under way and told those of his
sixty men who survived to prepare for a second tussle.
Fortunately another Yankee privateer joined the chase and
together they subdued the armed brig Hannah. When the Argo safely
convoyed the two prizes into New Bedford, “all who beheld her
were astonished that a vessel of her diminutive size could suffer
so much and yet get safely to port.”
Men fought and slew each other in those rude and distant days
with a certain courtesy, with a fine, punctilious regard for the
etiquette of the bloody game. There was the Scotch skipper of the
Betsy, a privateer, whom Silas Talbot hailed as follows, before
they opened fire:
“You must now haul down those British colors, my friend.”
“Notwithstanding I find you an enemy, as I suspected,” was the
dignified reply, “yet, sir, I shall let them hang a little bit
longer,--with your permission,--so fire away, Flanagan.”
During another of her cruises the Argo pursued an artfully
disguised ship of the line which could have blown her to kingdom
come with a broadside of thirty guns. The little Argo was
actually becalmed within short range, but her company got out the
sweeps and rowed her some distance before darkness and a favoring
slant of wind carried them clear. In the summer of 1780, Captain
Silas Talbot, again a mariner by title, was given the private
cruiser General Washington with one hundred and twenty men, but
he was less fortunate with her than when afloat in the tiny Argo
with his sixty Continentals. Off Sandy Hook he ran into the
British fleet under Admiral Arbuthnot and, being outsailed in a
gale of wind, he was forced to lower his flag to the great
seventy-four Culloden. After a year in English prisons he was
released and made his way home, serving no more in the war but
having the honor to command the immortal frigate Constitution in
1799 as a captain in the American Navy.
In several notable instances the privateersmen tried conclusions
with ships that flew the royal ensign, and got the better of
them. The hero of an uncommonly brilliant action of this sort was
Captain George Geddes of Philadelphia, who was entrusted with the
Congress, a noble privateer of twenty-four guns and two hundred
men. Several of the smaller British cruisers had been sending
parties ashore to plunder estates along the southern shores, and
one of them, the sloop of war Savage, had even raided
Washington’s home at Mount Vernon. Later she shifted to the coast
of Georgia in quest of loot and was unlucky enough to fall
athwart Captain Geddes in the Congress.
The privateer was the more formidable ship and faster on the
wind, forcing Captain Sterling of the Savage to accept the
challenge. Disabled aloft very early in the fight, Captain Geddes
was unable to choose his position, for which reason they
literally battled hand-to-hand, hulls grinding against each
other, the gunners scorched by the flashes of the cannon in the
ports of the opposing ship, with scarcely room to ply the
rammers, and the sailors throwing missiles from the decks, hand
grenades, cold shot, scraps of iron, belaying-pins.
As the vessels lay interlocked, the Savage was partly dismasted
and Captain Geddes, leaping upon the forecastle head, told the
boarders to follow him. Before they could swing their cutlases
and dash over the hammock-nettings, the British boatswain waved
his cap and yelled that the Savage had surrendered. Captain
Sterling was dead, eight others were killed, and twenty-four
wounded. The American loss was about the same. Captain Geddes,
however, was unable to save his prize because a British frigate
swooped down and took them both into Charleston.
When peace came in 1783, it was independence dearly bought by
land and sea, and no small part of the price was the loss of a
thousand merchant ships which would see their home ports no more.
Other misfortunes added to the toll of destruction. The great
fishing fleets which had been the chief occupation of coastwise
New England were almost obliterated and their crews were
scattered. Many of the men had changed their allegiance and were
sailing out of Halifax, and others were impressed into British
men-of-war or returned broken in health from long confinement in
British prisons. The ocean was empty of the stanch schooners
which had raced home with lee rails awash to cheer waiting wives
and sweethearts.
The fate of Nantucket and its whalers was even more tragic. This
colony on its lonely island amid the shoals was helpless against
raids by sea, and its ships and storehouses were destroyed
without mercy. Many vessels in distant waters were captured
before they were even aware that a state of war existed. Of a
fleet numbering a hundred and fifty sail, one hundred and
thirty-four were taken by the enemy and Nantucket whaling
suffered almost total extinction. These seamen, thus robbed of
their livelihood, fought nobly for their country’s cause. Theirs
was not the breed to sulk or whine in port. Twelve hundred of
them were killed or made prisoners during the Revolution. They
were to be found in the Army and Navy and behind the guns of
privateers. There were twenty-five Nantucket whalemen in the crew
of the Ranger when Paul Jones steered her across the Atlantic on
that famous cruise which inspired the old forecastle song that
begins
    ’Tis of the gallant Yankee ship
    That flew the Stripes and Stars,
    And the whistling wind from the west nor’west
    Blew through her pitch pine spars.
    With her starboard tacks aboard, my boys,
    She hung upon the gale.
    On an autumn night we raised the light
    Off the Old Head of Kinsale.
Pitiful as was the situation of Nantucket, with its only industry
wiped out and two hundred widows among the eight hundred families
left on the island, the aftermath of war seemed almost as ruinous
along the whole Atlantic coast. More ships could be built and
there were thousands of adventurous sailors to man them, but
where were the markets for the product of the farms and mills and
plantations? The ports of Europe had been so long closed to
American shipping that little demand was left for American goods.
To the Government of England the people of the Republic were no
longer fellow-countrymen but foreigners. As such they were
subject to the Navigation Acts, and no cargoes could be sent to
that kingdom unless in British vessels. The flourishing trade
with the West Indies was made impossible for the same reason, a
special Order in Council aiming at one fell stroke to “put an end
to the building and increase of American vessels” and to finish
the careers of three hundred West Indiamen already afloat. In the
islands themselves the results were appalling. Fifteen thousand
slaves died of starvation because the American traders were
compelled to cease bringing them dried fish and corn during
seasons in which their own crops were destroyed by hurricanes.
In 1776, one-third of the seagoing merchant marine of Great
Britain had been bought or built to order in America because
lumber was cheaper and wages were lower. This lucrative business
was killed by a law which denied Englishmen the privilege of
purchasing ships built in American yards. So narrow and bitter
was this commercial enmity, so ardent this desire to banish the
Stars and Stripes from blue water, that Lord Sheffield in 1784
advised Parliament that the pirates of Algiers and Tripoli really
benefited English commerce by preying on the shipping of weaker
nations. “It is not probable that the American States will have a
very free trade in the Mediterranean,” said he. “It will not be
to the interest of any of the great maritime Powers to protect
them from the Barbary States. If they know their interests, they
will not encourage the Americans to be carriers. That the Barbary
States are advantageous to maritime Powers is certain.”
Denied the normal ebb and flow of trade and commerce and with the
imports from England far exceeding the value of the merchandise
exported thence, the United States, already impoverished, was
drained of its money, and a currency of dollars, guineas, joes,
and moidores grew scarcer day by day. There was no help in a
government which consisted of States united only in name.
Congress comprised a handful of respectable gentlemen who had
little power and less responsibility, quarreling among themselves
for lack of better employment. Retaliation against England by
means of legislation was utterly impossible. Each State looked
after its commerce in its own peculiar fashion and the devil
might take the hindmost. Their rivalries and jealousies were like
those of petty kingdoms. If one State should close her ports is
to English ships, the others would welcome them in order to
divert the trade, with no feeling of national pride or federal
cooperation.
The Articles of Confederation had empowered Congress to make
treaties of commerce, but only such as did not restrain the
legislative power of any State from laying imposts and regulating
exports and imports. If a foreign power imposed heavy duties upon
American shipping, it was for the individual States and not for
Congress to say whether the vessels of the offending nation
should be allowed free entrance to the ports of the United
States: It was folly to suppose, ran the common opinion, that if
South Carolina should bar her ports to Spain because rice and
indigo were excluded from the Spanish colonies, New Hampshire,
which furnished masts and lumber for the Spanish Navy, ought to
do the same. The idea of turning the whole matter over to
Congress was considered preposterous by many intelligent
Americans.
In these thirteen States were nearly three and a quarter million
people hemmed in a long and narrow strip between the sea and an
unexplored wilderness in which the Indians were an ever present
peril. The Southern States, including Maryland, prosperous
agricultural regions, contained almost one-half the English-
speaking population of America. As colonies, they had found the
Old World eager for their rice, tobacco, indigo, and tar, and
slavery was the means of labor so firmly established that
one-fifth of the inhabitants were black. By contrast, the
Northern States were still concerned with commerce as the very
lifeblood of their existence. New England had not dreamed of the
millions of spindles which should hum on the banks of her rivers
and lure her young men and women from the farms to the clamorous
factory towns. The city of New York had not yet outgrown its
traffic in furs and its magnificent commercial destiny was still
unrevealed. It was a considerable seaport but not yet a gateway.
From Sandy Hook, however, to the stormy headlands of Maine, it
was a matter of life and death that ships should freely come and
go with cargoes to exchange. All other resources were trifling in
comparison.
In such compelling circumstances as these, necessity became the
mother of achievement. There is nothing finer in American history
than the dogged fortitude and high-hearted endeavor with which
the merchant seamen returned to their work after the Revolution
and sought and found new markets for their wares. It was then
that Salem played that conspicuous part which was, for a
generation, to overshadow the activities of all other American
seaports. Six thousand privateersmen had signed articles in her
taverns, as many as the total population of the town, and they
filled it with a spirit of enterprise and daring. Not for them
the stupid monotony of voyages coastwise if more hazardous
ventures beckoned and there were havens and islands unvexed by
trade where bold men might win profit and perhaps fight for life
and cargo.
Now there dwelt in Salem one of the great men of his time, Elias
Hasket Derby, the first American millionaire, and very much more
than this. He was a shipping merchant with a vision and with the
hard-headed sagacity to make his dreams come true. His was a
notable seafaring family, to begin with. His father, Captain
Richard Derby, born in 1712, had dispatched his small vessels to
the West Indies and Virginia and with the returns from these
voyages he had loaded assorted cargoes for Spain and Madeira and
had the proceeds remitted in bills of exchange to London or in
wine, salt, fruit, oil, lead, and handkerchiefs to America.
Richard Derby’s vessels had eluded or banged away at the
privateers during the French War from 1756 to 1763, mounting from
eight to twelve guns, “with four cannon below decks for close
quarters.” Of such a temper was this old sea-dog who led the
militia and defiantly halted General Gage’s regulars at the North
River bridge in Salem, two full months before the skirmish at
Lexington. Eight of the nineteen cannon which it was proposed to
seize from the patriots had been taken from the ships of Captain
Richard Derby and stored in his warehouse for the use of the
Provincial Congress.
It was Richard’s son, Captain John Derby, who carried to England
in the swift schooner Quero the first news of the affair at
Lexington, ahead of the King’s messenger. A sensational arrival,
if ever there was one! This Salem shipmaster, cracking on sail
like a proper son of his sire, making the passage in twenty-nine
days and handsomely beating the lubberly Royal Express Packet
Sukey which left Boston four days sooner, and startling the
British nation with the tidings which meant the loss of an
American empire! A singular coincidence was that this same
Captain John Derby should have been the first mariner to inform
the United States that peace had come, when he arrived from
France in 1783 with the message that a treaty had been signed.
Elias Hasket Derby was another son of Richard. When his manifold
energies were crippled by the war, he diverted his ability and
abundant resources into privateering. He was interested in at
least eighty of the privateers out of Salem, invariably
subscribing for such shares as might not be taken up by his
fellow-townsmen. He soon perceived that many of these craft were
wretchedly unfit for the purpose and were easily captured or
wrecked. It was characteristic of his genius that he should
establish shipyards of his own, turn his attention to naval
architecture, and begin to build a class of vessels vastly
superior in size, model, and speed to any previously launched in
the colonies. They were designed to meet the small cruiser of the
British Navy on even terms and were remarkably successful, both
in enriching their owner and in defying the enemy.
At the end of the war Elias Hasket Derby discovered that these
fine ships were too large and costly to ply up and down the
coast. Instead of bewailing his hard lot, he resolved to send
them to the other side of the globe. At a time when the British
and the Dutch East India companies insolently claimed a monopoly
of the trade of the Orient, when American merchant seamen had
never ventured beyond the two Atlantics, this was a conception
which made of commerce a surpassing romance and heralded the
golden era of the nation’s life upon the sea.
His Grand Turk of three hundred tons was promptly fitted out for
a pioneering voyage as far as the Cape of Good Hope. Salem knew
her as “the great ship” and yet her hull was not quite one
hundred feet long. Safely Captain Jonathan Ingersoll took her out
over the long road, his navigating equipment consisting of a few
erroneous maps and charts, a sextant, and Guthrie’s Geographical
Grammar. In Table Bay he sold his cargo of provisions and then
visited the coast of Guinea to dispose of his rum for ivory and
gold dust but brought not a single slave back, Mr. Derby having
declared that “he would rather sink the whole capital employed
than directly or indirectly be concerned in so infamous a
trade"--an unusual point of view for a shipping merchant of New
England in 1784!
Derby ships were first to go to Mauritius, then called the Isle
of France, first at Calcutta, and among the earliest to swing at
anchor off Canton. When Elias Hasket Derby decided to invade this
rich East India commerce, he sent his eldest son, Elias Hasket,
Jr., to England and the Continent after a course at Harvard. The
young man became a linguist and made a thorough study of English
and French methods of trade. Having laid this foundation for the
venture, the son was now sent to India, where he lived for three
years in the interests of his house, building up a trade almost
fabulously profitable.
How fortunes were won in those stirring days may be discerned
from the record of young Derby’s ventures while in the Orient. In
1788 the proceeds of one cargo enabled him to buy a ship and a
brigantine in the Isle of France. These two vessels he sent to
Bombay to load with cotton. Two other ships of his fleet, the
Astrea and Light Horse, were filled at Calcutta and Rangoon and
ordered to Salem. It was found, when the profits of these
transactions were reckoned, that the little squadron had earned
$100,000 above all outlay.
To carry on such a business as this enlisted many men and
industries. While the larger ships were making their distant
voyages, the brigs and schooners were gathering cargoes for
them, crossing to Gothenburg and St. Petersburg for iron, duck,
and hemp, to France, Spain, and Madeira for wine and lead, to the
French West Indies for molasses to be turned into rum, to New
York, Philadelphia, and Richmond for flour, provisions, and
tobacco. These shipments were assembled in the warehouses on
Derby Wharf and paid for the teas, coffees, pepper, muslin,
silks, and ivory which the ships from the Far East were fetching
home. In fourteen years the Derby ships made one hundred and
twenty-five voyages to Europe and far eastern ports and out of
the thirty-five vessels engaged only one was lost at sea.
It was in 1785 when the Grand Turk, on a second voyage, brought
back a cargo of silks, teas, and nankeens from Batavia and China,
that “The Independent Chronicle” of London, unconsciously
humorous, was moved to affirm that “the Americans have given up
all thought of a China trade which can never be carried on to
advantage without some settlement in the East Indies.”
As soon as these new sea-trails had been furrowed by the keels of
Elias Hasket Derby, other Salem merchants were quick to follow in
a rivalry which left no sea unexplored for virgin markets and
which ransacked every nook and corner of barbarism which had a
shore. Vessels slipped their cables and sailed away by night for
some secret destination with whose savage potentate trade
relations had been established. It might be Captain Jonathan
Carnes who, while at the port of Bencoolen in 1793, heard that
pepper grew wild on the northern coast of Sumatra. He whispered
the word to the Salem owner, who sent him back in the schooner
Rajah with only four guns and ten men. Eighteen months later,
Jonathan Carnes returned to Salem with a cargo of pepper in bulk,
the first direct importation, and cleared seven hundred per cent
on the voyage. When he made ready to go again, keeping his
business strictly to himself, other owners tracked him clear to
Bencoolen, but there he vanished in the Rajah, and his secret with
him, until he reappeared with another precious cargo of pepper.
When, at length, he shared this trade with other vessels, it
meant that Salem controlled the pepper market of Sumatra and for
many years supplied a large part of the world’s demand.
And so it happened that in the spicy warehouses that overlooked
Salem Harbor there came to be stored hemp from Luzon, gum copal
from Zanzibar, palm oil from Africa, coffee from Arabia, tallow
from Madagascar, whale oil from the Antarctic, hides and wool
from the Rio de la Plata, nutmeg and cloves from Malaysia. Such
merchandise had been bought or bartered for by shipmasters who
were much more than mere navigators. They had to be shrewd
merchants on their own accounts, for the success or failure of a
voyage was mostly in their hands. Carefully trained and highly
intelligent men, they attained command in the early twenties and
were able to retire, after a few years more afloat, to own ships
and exchange the quarterdeck for the counting-room, and the cabin
for the solid mansion and lawn on Derby Street. Every
opportunity, indeed, was offered them to advance their own
fortunes. They sailed not for wages but for handsome commissions
and privileges--in the Derby ships, five per cent of a cargo
outward bound, two and a half per cent of the freightage home,
five per cent profit on goods bought and sold between foreign
ports, and five per cent of the cargo space for their own use.
Such was the system which persuaded the pick and flower of young
American manhood to choose the sea as the most advantageous
career possible. There was the Crowninshield family, for example,
with five brothers all in command of ships before they were old
enough to vote and at one time all five away from Salem, each in
his own vessel and three of them in the East India trade. “When
little boys,” to quote from the memoirs of Benjamin
Crowninshield, “they were all sent to a common school and about
their eleventh year began their first particular study which
should develop them as sailors and ship captains. These boys
studied their navigation as little chaps of twelve years old and
were required to thoroughly master the subject before being sent
to sea . . . . As soon as the art of navigation was mastered, the
youngsters were sent to sea, sometimes as common sailors but
commonly as ship’s clerks, in which position they were able to
learn everything about the management of a ship without actually
being a common sailor.”
This was the practice in families of solid station and social
rank, for to be a shipmaster was to follow the profession of a
gentleman. Yet the bright lad who entered by way of the
forecastle also played for high stakes. Soon promoted to the
berth of mate, he was granted cargo space for his own adventures
in merchandise and a share of the profits. In these days the
youth of twenty-one is likely to be a college undergraduate,
rated too callow and unfit to be intrusted with the smallest
business responsibilities and tolerantly regarded as unable to
take care of himself. It provokes both a smile and a glow of
pride, therefore, to recall those seasoned striplings and what
they did.
No unusual instance was that of Nathaniel Silsbee, later United
States Senator from Massachusetts, who took command of the new
ship Benjamin in the year 1792, laden with a costly cargo from
Salem for the Cape of Good Hope and India, “with such
instructions,” says he, “as left the management of the voyage
very much to my own discretion. Neither myself nor the chief
mate, Mr. Charles Derby, had attained the age of twenty-one years
when we left home. I was not then twenty.” This reminded him to
speak of his own family. Of the three Silsbee brothers, “each of
us obtained the command of vessels and the consignment of their
cargoes before attaining the age of twenty years, viz., myself at
the age of eighteen and a half, my brother William at nineteen
and a half, and my brother Zachariah before he was twenty years
old. Each and all of us left off going to sea before reaching the
age of twenty-nine years.”
How resourcefully these children of the sea could handle affairs
was shown in this voyage of the Benjamin. While in the Indian
Ocean young Silsbee fell in with a frigate which gave him news of
the beginning of war between England and France. He shifted his
course for Mauritius and there sold the cargo for a dazzling
price in paper dollars, which he turned into Spanish silver. An
embargo detained him for six months, during which this currency
increased to three times the value of the paper money. He gave up
the voyage to Calcutta, sold the Spanish dollars and loaded with
coffee and spices for Salem. At the Cape of Good Hope, however,
he discovered that he could earn a pretty penny by sending his
cargo home in other ships and loading the Benjamin again for
Mauritius. When, at length, he arrived in Salem harbor, after
nineteen months away, his enterprises had reaped a hundred per
cent for Elias Hasket Derby and his own share was the snug little
fortune of four thousand dollars. Part of this he, of course,
invested at sea, and at twenty-two he was part owner of the
Betsy, East Indiaman, and on the road to independence.
As second mate in the Benjamin had sailed Richard Cleveland,
another matured mariner of nineteen, who crowded into one life an
Odyssey of adventure noteworthy even in that era and who had the
knack of writing about it with rare skill and spirit. In 1797,
when twenty-three years old, he was master of the bark Enterprise
bound from Salem to Mocha for coffee. The voyage was abandoned at
Havre and he sent the mate home with the ship, deciding to remain
abroad and gamble for himself with the chances of the sea. In
France he bought on credit a “cutter-sloop” of forty-three tons,
no larger than the yachts whose owners think it venturesome to
take them off soundings in summer cruises. In this little box of
a craft he planned to carry a cargo of merchandise to the Cape of
Good Hope and thence to Mauritius.
His crew included two men, a black cook, and a brace of boys who
were hastily shipped at Havre. “Fortunately they were all so much
in debt as not to want any time to spend their advance, but were
ready at the instant, and with this motley crew, (who, for aught
I knew, were robbers or pirates) I put to sea.” The only sailor
of the lot was a Nantucket lad who was made mate and had to be
taught the rudiments of navigation while at sea. Of the others he
had this to say, in his lighthearted manner:
“The first of my fore-mast hands is a great, surly, crabbed,
raw-boned, ignorant Prussian who is so timid aloft that the mate
has frequently been obliged to do his duty there. I believe him
to be more of a soldier than a sailor, though he has often
assured me that he has been a boatswain’s mate of a Dutch
Indiaman, which I do not believe as he hardly knows how to put
two ends of a rope together .... My cook . . . a good-natured
negro and a tolerable cook, so unused to a vessel that in the
smoothest weather he cannot walk fore and aft without holding
onto something with both hands. This fear proceeds from the fact
that he is so tall and slim that if he should get a cant it might
be fatal to him. I did not think America could furnish such a
specimen of the negro race . . . nor did I ever see such a
simpleton. It is impossible to teach him anything and . . . he
can hardly tell the main-halliards from the mainstay.
“Next is an English boy of seventeen years old, who from having
lately had the small-pox is feeble and almost blind, a miserable
object, but pity for his misfortunes induces me to make his duty
as easy as possible. Finally I have a little ugly French boy, the
very image of a baboon, who from having served for some time on
different privateers has all the tricks of a veteran man-of-war’s
man, though only thirteen years old, and by having been in an
English prison, has learned enough of the language to be a
proficient in swearing.”
With these human scrapings for a ship’s company, the cutter
Caroline was three months on her solitary way as far as the Cape
of Good Hope, where the inhabitants “could not disguise their
astonishment at the size of the vessel, the boyish appearance of
the master and mate, and the queer and unique characters of the
two men and boy who composed the crew.” The English officials
thought it strange indeed, suspecting some scheme of French spies
or smuggled dispatches, but Richard Cleveland’s petition to the
Governor, Lord McCartney, ingenuously patterned after certain
letters addressed to noblemen as found in an old magazine aboard
his vessel, won the day for him and he was permitted to sell the
cutter and her cargo, having changed his mind about proceeding
farther.
Taking passage to Batavia, he looked about for another venture
but found nothing to his liking and wandered on to Canton, where
he was attracted by the prospect of a voyage to the northwest
coast of America to buy furs from the Indians. In a cutter no
larger than the Caroline he risked all his cash and credit,
stocking her with $20,000 worth of assorted merchandise for
barter, and put out across the Pacific, “having on board
twenty-one persons, consisting, except two Americans, of English,
Irish, Swedes and French, but principally the first, who were
runaways from the men-of-war and Indiamen, and two from a Botany
Bay ship who had made their escape, for we were obliged to take
such as we could get, served to complete a list of as
accomplished villains as ever disgraced any country.”
After a month of weary, drenching hardship off the China coast,
this crew of cutthroats mutinied. With a loyal handful, including
the black cook, Cleveland locked up the provisions, mounted two
four-pounders on the quarterdeck, rammed them full of grape-shot,
and fetched up the flint-lock muskets and pistols from the cabin.
The mutineers were then informed that if they poked their heads
above the hatches he would blow them overboard. Losing enthusiasm
and weakened by hunger, they asked to be set ashore; so the
skipper marooned the lot. For two days the cutter lay offshore
while a truce was argued, the upshot being that four of the
rascals gave in and the others were left behind.
Fifty days more of it and, washed by icy seas, racked and
storm-beaten, the vessel made Norfolk Sound. So small was the
crew, so imminent the danger that the Indians might take her by
boarding, that screens of hides were rigged along the bulwarks to
hide the deck from view. Stranded and getting clear, warding off
attacks, Captain Richard Cleveland stayed two months on the
wilderness coast of Oregon, trading one musket for eight prime
sea-otter skins until there was no more room below. Sixty
thousand dollars was the value of the venture when he sailed for
China by way of the Sandwich Islands, forty thousand of profit,
and he was twenty-five years old with the zest for roving
undiminished.
He next appeared in Calcutta, buying a twenty-five-ton pilot boat
under the Danish flag for a fling at Mauritius and a speculation
in prizes brought in by French privateers. Finding none in port,
he loaded seven thousand bags of coffee in a ship for Copenhagen
and conveyed as a passenger a kindred spirit, young Nathaniel
Shaler, whom he took into partnership. At Hamburg these two
bought a fast brig, the Lelia Byrd, to try their fortune on the
west coast of South America, and recruited a third partner, a
boyish Polish nobleman, Count de Rousillon, who had been an aide
to Kosciusko. Three seafaring musketeers, true gentlemen rovers,
all under thirty, sailing out to beard the viceroys of Spain!
From Valparaiso, where other American ships were detained and
robbed, they adroitly escaped and steered north to Mexico and
California. At San Diego they fought their way out of the harbor,
silencing the Spanish fort with their six guns. Then to Canton
with furs, and Richard Cleveland went home at thirty years of age
after seven years’ absence and voyaging twice around the world,
having wrested success from almost every imaginable danger and
obstacle, with $70,000 to make him a rich man in his own town. He
was neither more nor less than an American sailor of the kind
that made the old merchant marine magnificent.
It was true romance, also, when the first American shipmasters
set foot in mysterious Japan, a half century before Perry’s
squadron shattered the immemorial isolation of the land of the
Shoguns and the Samurai. Only the Dutch had been permitted to
hold any foreign intercourse whatever with this hermit nation and
for two centuries they had maintained their singular commercial
monopoly at a price measured in terms of the deepest degradation
of dignity and respect. The few Dutch merchants suffered to
reside in Japan were restricted to a small island in Nagasaki
harbor, leaving it only once in four years when the Resident, or
chief agent, journeyed to Yeddo to offer gifts and most humble
obeisance to the Shogun, “creeping forward on his hands and feet,
and falling on his knees, bowed his head to the ground, and
retired again in absolute silence, crawling exactly like a crab,"
said one of these pilgrims who added: “We may not keep Sundays or
fast days, or allow our spiritual hymns or prayers to be heard;
never mention the name of Christ. Besides these things, we have
to submit to other insulting imputations which are always painful
to a noble heart. The reason which impels the Dutch to bear all
these sufferings so patiently is simply the love of gain.”
In return for these humiliations the Dutch East India Company was
permitted to send one or two ships a year from Batavia to Japan
and to export copper, silk, gold, camphor, porcelain, bronze, and
rare woods. The American ship Franklin arrived at Batavia in 1799
and Captain James Devereux of Salem learned that a charter was
offered for one of these annual voyages. After a deal of Yankee
dickering with the hard-headed Dutchmen, a bargain was struck and
the Franklin sailed for Nagasaki with cloves, chintz, sugar, tin,
black pepper, sapan wood, and elephants’ teeth. The instructions
were elaborate and punctilious, salutes to be fired right and
left, nine guns for the Emperor’s guard while passing in,
thirteen guns at the anchorage; all books on board to be sealed
up in a cask, Bibles in particular, and turned over to the
Japanese officials, all firearms sent ashore, ship dressed with
colors whenever the “Commissaries of the Chief” graciously came
aboard, and a carpet on deck for them to sit upon.
Two years later, the Margaret of Salem made the same sort of a
voyage, and in both instances the supercargoes, one of whom
happened to be a younger brother of Captain Richard Cleveland,
wrote journals of the extraordinary episode. For these mariners
alone was the curtain lifted which concealed the feudal Japan
from the eyes of the civilized world. Alert and curious, these
Yankee traders explored the narrow streets of Nagasaki, visited
temples, were handsomely entertained by officers and merchants,
and exchanged their wares in the marketplace. They were as much
at home, no doubt, as when buying piculs of pepper from a rajah
of Qualah Battoo, or dining with an elderly mandarin of Cochin
China. It was not too much to say that “the profuse stores of
knowledge brought by every ship’s crew, together with unheard of
curiosities from every savage shore, gave the community of Salem
a rare alertness of intellect.”
It was a Salem bark, the Lydia, that first displayed the American
flag to the natives of Guam in 1801. She was chartered by the
Spanish government of Manila to carry to the Marianne Islands, as
those dots on the chart of the Pacific were then called, the new
Governor, his family, his suite, and his luggage. First Mate
William Haswell kept a diary in a most conscientious fashion, and
here and there one gleans an item with a humor of its own. “Now
having to pass through dangerous straits,” he observes, “we went
to work to make boarding nettings and to get our arms in the best
order, but had we been attacked we should have been taken with
ease. Between Panay and Negros all the passengers were in the
greatest confusion for fear of being taken  and put to death in
the dark and not have time to say their prayers.”
The decks were in confusion most of the time, what with the
Governor, his lady, three children, two servant girls and twelve
men servants, a friar and his servant, a judge and two servants,
not to mention some small hogs, two sheep, an ox, and a goat to
feed the passengers who were too dainty for sea provender. The
friar was an interesting character. A great pity that the worthy
mate of the Lydia should not have been more explicit! It
intrigues the reader of his manuscript diary to be told that “the
Friar was praying night and day but it would not bring a fair
wind. His behavior was so bad that we were forced to send him to
Coventry, or in other words, no one would speak to him.”
The Spanish governors of Guam had in operation an economic system
which compelled the admiration of this thrifty Yankee mate. The
natives wore very few clothes, he concluded, because the Governor
was the only shopkeeper and he insisted on a profit of at least
eight hundred per cent. There was a native militia regiment of a
thousand men who were paid ten dollars a year. With this cash
they bought Bengal goods, cottons, Chinese pans, pots, knives,
and hoes at the Governor’s store, so that “all this money never
left the Governor’s hands. It was fetched to him by the galleons
in passing, and when he was relieved he carried it with him to
Manila, often to the amount of eighty or ninety thousand
dollars.” A glimpse of high finance without a flaw!
There is pathos, simple and moving, in the stories of shipwreck
and stranding on hostile or desert coasts. These disasters were
far more frequent then than now, because navigation was partly
guesswork and ships were very small. Among these tragedies was
that of the Commerce, bound from Boston to Bombay in 1793. The
captain lost his bearings and thought he was off Malabar when the
ship piled up on the beach in the night. The nearest port was
Muscat and the crew took to the boats in the hope of reaching it.
Stormy weather drove them ashore where armed Arabs on camels
stripped them of clothes and stores and left them to die among
the sand dunes.
On foot they trudged day after day in the direction of Muscat,
and how they suffered and what they endured was told by one of
the survivors, young Daniel Saunders. Soon they began to drop out
and die in their tracks in the manner of “Benjamin Williams,
William Leghorn, and Thomas Barnard whose bodies were exposed
naked to the scorching sun and finding their strength and spirits
quite exhausted they lay down expecting nothing but death for
relief.” The next to be left behind was Mr. Robert Williams,
merchant and part owner, “and we therefore with reluctance
abandoned him to the mercy of God, suffering ourselves all the
horrors that fill the mind at the approach of death.” Near the
beach and a forlorn little oasis, they stumbled across Charles
Lapham, who had become separated from them. He had been without
water for five days “and after many efforts he got upon his feet
and endeavored to walk. Seeing him in so wretched a condition I
could not but sympathize enough with him in his torments to go
back with him” toward water two miles away, “which both my other
companions refused to do. Accordingly they walked forward while I
went back a considerable distance with Lapham until, his strength
failing him, he suddenly fell on the ground, nor was he able to
rise again or even speak to me. Finding it vain to stay with him,
I covered him with sprays and leaves which I tore from an
adjacent tree, it being the last friendly office I could do him.”
Eight living skeletons left of eighteen strong seamen tottered
into Muscat and were cared for by the English consul. Daniel
Saunders worked his passage to England, was picked up by a
press-gang, escaped, and so returned to Salem. It was the fate of
Juba Hill, the black cook from Boston, to be detained among the
Arabs as a slave. It is worth noting that a black sea-cook
figured in many of these tales of daring and disaster, and among
them was the heroic and amazing figure of one Peter Jackson who
belonged in the brig Ceres. While running down the river from
Calcutta she was thrown on her beam ends and Peter, perhaps
dumping garbage over the rail, took a header. Among the things
tossed to him as he floated away was a sail-boom on which he was
swiftly carried out of sight by the turbid current. All on board
concluded that Peter Jackson had been eaten by sharks or
crocodiles and it was so reported when they arrived home. An
administrator was appointed for his goods and chattels and he was
officially deceased in the eyes of the law. A year or so later
this unconquerable sea-cook appeared in the streets of Salem,
grinning a welcome to former shipmates who fled from him in
terror as a ghostly visitation. He had floated twelve hours on
his sail-boom, it seemed, fighting off the sharks with his feet;
and finally drifting ashore. “He had hard work to do away with
the impressions of being dead,” runs the old account, “but
succeeded and was allowed the rights and privileges of the
living.”
The community of interests in these voyages of long ago included
not only the ship’s company but also the townspeople, even the
boys and girls, who entrusted their little private speculations
or “adventures” to the captain. It was a custom which flourished
well into the nineteenth century. These memoranda are sprinkled
through the account books of the East Indiamen out of Salem and
Boston. It might be Miss Harriet Elkins who requested the master
of the Messenger “please to purchase at Calcutta two net beads
with draperies; if at Batavia or any spice market, nutmegs or
mace; or if at Canton, two Canton shawls of the enclosed colors
at $5 per shawl. Enclosed is $10.”
Again, it might be Mr. John R. Tucker who ventured in the same
ship one hundred Spanish dollars to be invested in coffee and
sugar, or Captain Nathaniel West who risked in the Astrea fifteen
boxes of spermaceti candles and a pipe of Teneriffe wine. It is
interesting to discover what was done with Mr. Tucker’s hundred
Spanish dollars, as invested for him by the skipper of the
Messenger at Batavia and duly accounted for. Ten bags of coffee
were bought for $83.30, the extra expenses of duty, boat-hire,
and sacking bringing the total outlay to $90.19. The coffee was
sold at Antwerp on the way home for $183.75, and Mr. Tucker’s
handsome profit on the adventure was therefore $93.56, or more
than one hundred per cent.
It was all a grand adventure, in fact, and the word was aptly
chosen to fit this ocean trade. The merchant freighted his ship
and sent her out to vanish from his ken for months and months of
waiting, with the greater part of his savings, perhaps, in goods
and specie beneath her hatches. No cable messages kept him in
touch with her nor were there frequent letters from the master.
Not until her signal was displayed by the fluttering flags of the
headland station at the harbor mouth could he know whether he had
gained or lost a fortune. The spirit of such merchants was
admirably typified in the last venture of Elias Hasket Derby in
1798, when unofficial war existed between the United States and
France.
American ships were everywhere seeking refuge from the privateers
under the tricolor, which fairly ran amuck in the routes of
trade. For this reason it meant a rich reward to land a cargo
abroad. The ship Mount Vernon, commanded by Captain Elias Hasket
Derby, Jr., was laden with sugar and coffee for Mediterranean
ports, and was prepared for trouble, with twenty guns mounted and
fifty men to handle them. A smart ship and a powerful one, she
raced across to Cape Saint Vincent in sixteen days, which was
clipper speed. She ran into a French fleet of sixty sail,
exchanged broadsides with the nearest, and showed her stern to
the others.
“We arrived at 12 o’clock [wrote Captain Derby from Gibraltar]
popping at Frenchmen all the forenoon. At 10 A.M. off Algeciras
Point we were seriously attacked by a large latineer who had on
board more than one hundred men. He came so near our broadside as
to allow our six-pound grape to do execution handsomely. We then
bore away and gave him our stern guns in a cool and deliberate
manner, doing apparently great execution. Our bars having cut his
sails considerably, he was thrown into confusion, struck both his
ensign and his pennant. I was then puzzled to know what to do
with so many men; our ship was running large with all her
steering sails out, so that we could not immediately bring her to
the wind, and we were directly off Algeciras Point from whence I
had reason to fear she might receive assistance, and my port
Gibraltar in full view. These were circumstances that induced me
to give up the gratification of bringing him in. It was, however,
a satisfaction to flog the rascal in full view of the English
fleet who were to leeward.”
Soon after the Revolution the spirit of commercial exploration
began to stir in other ports than Salem. Out from New York sailed
the ship Empress of China in 1784 for the first direct voyage to
Canton, to make the acquaintance of a vast nation absolutely
unknown to the people of the United States, nor had one in a
million of the industrious and highly civilized Chinese ever so
much as heard the name of the little community of barbarians who
dwelt on the western shore of the North Atlantic. The oriental
dignitaries in their silken robes graciously welcomed the
foreign ship with the strange flag and showed a lively interest
in the map spread upon the cabin table, offering every facility
to promote this new market for their silks and teas. After an
absence of fifteen months the Empress of China returned to her
home port and her pilgrimage aroused so much attention that the
report of the supercargo, Samuel Shaw, was read in Congress.
Surpassing this achievement was that of Captain Stewart Dean, who
very shortly afterward had his fling at the China trade in an
eighty-ton sloop built at Albany. He was a stout-hearted old
privateersman of the Revolution whom nothing could dismay, and in
this tiny Experiment of his he won merited fame as one of the
American pioneers of blue water. Fifteen men and boys sailed with
him, drilled and disciplined as if the sloop were a frigate, and
when the Experiment hauled into the stream, of Battery Park, New
York, “martial music and the boatswain’s whistle were heard on
board with all the pomp and circumstance of war.” Typhoons and
Malay proas, Chinese pirates and unknown shoals, had no terrors
for Stewart Dean. He saw Canton for himself, found a cargo, and
drove home again in a four months’ passage, which was better than
many a clipper could do at a much later day. Smallest and bravest
of the first Yankee East Indiamen, this taut sloop, with the
boatswain’s pipe trilling cheerily and all hands ready with
cutlases and pikes to repel boarders, was by no means the least
important vessel that ever passed in by Sandy Hook.
In the beginnings of this picturesque relation with the Far East,
Boston lagged behind Salem, but her merchants, too, awoke to the
opportunity and so successfully that for generations there were
no more conspicuous names and shipping-houses in the China trade
than those of Russell, Perkins, and Forbes. The first attempt was
very ambitious and rather luckless. The largest merchantman ever
built at that time in the United States was launched at Quincy in
1789 to rival the towering ships of the British East India
Company. This Massachusetts created a sensation. Her departure
was a national event. She embodied the dreams of Captain Randall
and of the Samuel Shaw who had gone as supercargo in the Empress
of China. They formed a partnership and were able to find the
necessary capital.
This six-hundred-ton ship loomed huge in the ayes of the crowds
which visited her. She was in fact no larger than such
four-masted coasting schooners as claw around Hatteras with
deck-loads of Georgia pine or fill with coal for down East, and
manage it comfortably with seven or eight men for a crew. The
Massachusetts, however, sailed in 411 the old-fashioned state and
dignity of a master, four mates, a purser, surgeon, carpenter,
gunner, four quartermasters, three midshipmen, a cooper, two
cooks, a steward, and fifty seamen. The second officer was Amasa
Delano, a man even more remarkable than the ship, who wandered
far and wide and wrote a fascinating book about his voyages, a
classic of its kind, the memoirs of an American merchant mariner
of a breed long since extinct.
While the Massachusetts was fitting out at Boston, one small
annoyance ruffled the auspicious undertaking. Three different
crews were signed before a full complement could be persuaded to
tarry in the forecastle. The trouble was caused by a
fortune-teller of Lynn, Moll Pitcher by name, who predicted
disaster for the ship. Now every honest sailor knows that certain
superstitions are gospel fact, such as the bad luck brought by a
cross-eyed Finn, a black cat, or going to sea on Friday, and
these eighteenth century shellbacks must not be too severely
chided for deserting while they had the chance. As it turned out,
the voyage did have a sorry ending and death overtook an
astonishingly large number of the ship’s people.
Though she had been designed and built by master craftsmen of New
England who knew their trade surpassingly well, it was discovered
when the ship arrived at Canton that her timbers were already
rotting. They were of white oak which had been put into her green
instead of properly seasoned. This blunder wrecked the hopes of
her owners. To cap it, the cargo of masts and spars had also been
stowed while wet and covered with mud and ice, and the hatches
had been battened. As a result the air became so foul with decay
that several hundred barrels of beef were spoiled. To repair the
ship was beyond the means of Captain Randall and Samuel Shaw, and
reluctantly they sold her to the Danish East India Company at a
heavy loss. Nothing could have been more unexpected than to find
that, for once, the experienced shipbuilders had been guilty of a
miscalculation.
The crew scattered, and perhaps the prediction of the
fortune-teller of Lynn followed their roving courses, for when
Captain Amasa Delano tried to trace them a few years later, he
jotted down such obituaries as these on the list of names:
 “John Harris. A slave in Algiers at last accounts.
  Roger Dyer. Died and thrown overboard off Cape Horn.
  William Williams. Lost overboard off Japan.
  James Crowley. Murdered by the Chinese near Macao.
  John Johnson. Died on board an English Indiaman.
  Seth Stowell. Was drowned at Whampoa in 1790.
  Jeremiah Chace. Died with the small-pox at Whampoa in 1791.
  Humphrey Chadburn. Shot and died at Whampoa in 1791.
  Samuel Tripe. Drowned off Java Head in 1790.
  James Stackpole. Murdered by the Chinese.
  Nicholas Nicholson. Died with the leprosy at Macao.
  William Murphy. Killed by Chinese pirates.
  Larry Conner. Killed at sea.”
There were more of these gruesome items--so many of them that it
appears as though no more than a handful of this stalwart crew
survived the Massachusetts by a dozen years. Incredible as it
sounds, Captain Delano’s roster accounted for fifty of them as
dead while he was still in the prime of life, and most of them
had been snuffed out by violence. As for his own career, it was
overcast by no such unlucky star, and he passed unscathed through
all the hazards and vicissitudes that could be encountered in
that rugged and heroic era of endeavor. Set adrift in Canton when
the Massachusetts was sold, he promptly turned his hand to
repairing a large Danish ship which had been wrecked by storm,
and he virtually rebuilt her to the great satisfaction of the
owners.
Thence, with money in his pocket, young Delano went to Macao,
where he fell in with Commodore John McClure of the English Navy,
who was in command of an expedition setting out to explore a part
of the South Seas, including the Pelew Islands, New Guinea, New
Holland, and the Spice Islands. The Englishman liked this
resourceful Yankee seaman and did him the honor to say, recalls
Delano, “that he considered I should be a very useful man to him
as a seaman, an officer, or a shipbuilder; and if it was
agreeable to me to go on board the Panther with him, I should
receive the some pay and emoluments with his lieutenants and
astronomers.” A signal honor it was at a time when no love was
lost between British and American seafarers who had so recently
fought each other afloat.
And so Amasa Delano embarked as a lieutenant of the Bombay
Marine, to explore tropic harbors and goons until then unmapped
and to parley with dusky kings. Commodore McClure, diplomatic and
humane, had almost no trouble with the untutored islanders,
except on the coast of New Guinea, where the Panther was attacked
by a swarm of canoes and the surgeon was killed. It was a
spirited little affair, four-foot arrows pelting like hail across
the deck, a cannon hurling grapeshot from the taffrail, Amasa
Delano hit in the chest and pulling out the arrow to jump to his
duty again.
Only a few years earlier the mutineers of the Bounty had
established themselves on Pitcairn Island, and Delano was able to
compile the first complete narrative of this extraordinary
colony, which governed itself in the light of the primitive
Christian virtues. There was profound wisdom in the comment of
Amasa Delano: “While the present natural, simple, and
affectionate character prevails among these descendants of the
mutineers, they will be delightful to our minds, they will be
amiable and acceptable in the sight of God, and they will be
useful and happy among themselves. Let it be our fervent prayer
that neither canting and hypocritical emissaries from schools of
artificial theology on the one hand, nor sensual and licentious
crews and adventurers on the other, may ever enter the charming
village of Pitcairn to give disease to the minds or the bodies of
the unsuspecting inhabitants.”
Two years of this intensely romantic existence, and Delano
started homeward. But there was a chance of profit at Mauritius,
and there he bought a tremendous East Indiaman of fourteen
hundred tons as a joint venture with a Captain Stewart and put a
crew of a hundred and fifty men on board. She had been brought in
by a French privateer and Delano was moved to remark, with an
indignation which was much in advance of his times: “Privateering
is entirely at variance with the first principle of honorable
warfare . . . . This system of licensed robbery enables a wicked
and mercenary man to insult and injure even neutral friends on
the ocean; and when he meets an honest sailor who may have all
his earnings on board his ship but who carries an enemy’s flag,
he plunders him of every cent and leaves him the poor consolation
that it is done according to law . . . . When the Malay subjects
of Abba Thule cut down the cocoanut trees of an enemy, in the
spirit of private revenge, he asked them why they acted in
opposition to the principles on which they knew he always made
and conducted a war. They answered, and let the reason make us
humble, ’The English do so.’”
In his grand East Indiaman young Captain Delano traded on the
coast of India but soon came to grief. The enterprise had been
too large for him to swing with what cash and credit he could
muster, and the ship was sold from under him to pay her debts.
Again on the beach, with one solitary gold moidore in his purse,
he found a friendly American skipper who offered him a passage to
Philadelphia, which he accepted with the pious reflection that,
although his mind was wounded and mortified by the financial
disaster, his motives had been perfectly pure and honest. He
never saw his native land with so little pleasure as on this
return to it, he assures us, and the shore on which he would have
leaped with delight was covered with gloom and sadness.
Now what makes it so well worth while to sketch in brief outline
the careers of one and another of these bygone shipmasters is
that they accurately reflected the genius and the temper of their
generation. There was, in truth, no such word as failure in their
lexicon. It is this quality that appeals to us beyond all else.
Thrown on their beam ends, they were presently planning something
else, eager to shake dice with destiny and with courage unbroken.
It was so with Amasa Delano, who promptly went to work “with what
spirits I could revive within me. After a time they returned to
their former elasticity.”
He obtained a position as master builder in a shipyard, saved
some money, borrowed more, and with one of his brothers was soon
blithely building a vessel of two hundred tons for a voyage into
the Pacific and to the northwest coast after seals. They sailed
along Patagonia and found much to interest them, dodged in and
out of the ports of Chili and Peru, and incidentally recaptured a
Spanish ship which was in the hands of the slaves who formed her
cargo.
This was all in the day’s work and happened at the island of
Santa Maria, not far from Juan Fernandez, where Captain Delano’s
Perseverance found the high-pooped Tryal in a desperate state.
Spanish sailors who had survived the massacre were leaping
overboard or scrambling up to the mastheads while the African
savages capered on deck and flourished their weapons. Captain
Delano liked neither the Spaniard nor the slavetrade, but it was
his duty to help fellow seamen in distress; so he cleared for
action and ordered two boats away to attend to the matter. The
chief mate, Rufus Low, was in charge, and a gallant sailor he
showed himself. They had to climb the high sides of the Tryal and
carry, in hand-to-hand conflict, the barricades of water-casks
and bales of matting which the slaves had built across the deck.
There was no hanging back, and even a mite of a midshipman from
Boston pranced into it with his dirk. The negroes were well armed
and fought ferociously. The mate was seriously wounded, four
seamen were stabbed, the Spanish first mate had two musket balls
in him, and a passenger was killed in the fray.
Having driven the slaves below and battened them down, the
American party returned next morning to put the irons on them. A
horrid sight confronted them. Thirsting for vengeance, the
Spanish sailors had spread-eagled several of the negroes to
ringbolts in the deck and were shaving the living flesh from them
with razor-edged boarding lances. Captain Delano thereupon
disarmed these brutes and locked them up in their turn, taking
possession of the ship until he could restore order. The sequel
was that he received the august thanks of the Viceroy of Chili
and a gold medal from His Catholic Majesty. As was the custom,
the guilty slaves, poor wretches, were condemned to be dragged to
the gibbet at the tails of mules, to be hanged, their bodies
burned, and their heads stuck upon poles in the plaza.
It was while in this Chilean port of Talcahuano that Amasa Delano
heard the tale of the British whaler which had sailed just before
his arrival. He tells it so well that I am tempted to quote it as
a generous tribute to a sailor of a rival race. After all, they
were sprung from a common stock and blood was thicker than water.
Besides, it is the sort of yarn that ought to be dragged to the
light of day from its musty burial between the covers of Delano’s
rare and ancient “Voyages and Travels.”
The whaler Betsy, it seems, went in and anchored under the guns
of the forts to seek provisions and make repairs. The captain
went ashore to interview the officials, leaving word that no
Spaniards should be allowed to come aboard because of the bad
feeling against the English. Three or four large boats filled
with troops presently veered alongside and were ordered to keep
clear. This command was resented, and the troops opened fire,
followed by the forts. Now for the deed of a man with his two
feet under him.
“The chief officer of the Betsy whose name was Hudson, a man of
extraordinary bravery, cut his cable and his ship swung the wrong
way, with her head in shore, passing close to several Spanish
ships which, with every vessel in the harbor that could bring a
gun to bear, together with three hundred soldiers in boats and on
ship’s decks and the two batteries, all kept up a constant fire
on him. The wind was light, nearly a calm. The shot flew so thick
that it was difficult for him to make sail, some part of the
rigging being cut away every minute.
“He kept his men at the guns, and when the ship swung her
broadside so as to bear upon any of the Spanish ships, he kept up
a fire at them. In this situation the brave fellow continued to
lie for three-quarters of an hour before he got his topsails
sheeted home. The action continued in this manner for near an
hour and a half. He succeeded in getting the ship to sea,
however, in defiance of all the force that could be brought
against him. The ship was very much cut to pieces in sails,
rigging, and hull; and a considerable number of men were killed
and wounded on board.
“Hudson kept flying from one part of the deck to the other during
the whole time of action, encouraging and threatening the men as
occasion required. He kept a musket in his hand most part of the
time, firing when he could find the leisure. Some of the men came
aft and begged him to give up the ship, telling him they should
all be killed--that the carpenter had all one side of him shot
away--that one man was cut in halves with a double-headed shot as
he was going aloft to loose the foretopsail and the body had
fallen on deck in two separate parts--that such a man was killed
at his duty on the forecastle, and one more had been killed in
the maintop--that Sam, Jim, Jack, and Tom were wounded and that
they would do nothing more towards getting the ship out of the
harbor.
“His reply to them was, ’then you shall be sure to die, for if
they do not kill you I will, so sure as you persist in any such
cowardly resolution,’ saying at the same time, ’OUT SHE GOES, OR
DOWN SHE GOES.’”
By this resolute and determined conduct he kept the men to their
duty and succeeded in accomplishing one of the most daring
enterprises perhaps ever attempted.
An immortal phrase, this simple dictum of first mate Hudson of
the Betsy, “Out she goes, or down she goes,” and not unworthy of
being mentioned in the same breath with Farragut’s “Damn the
torpedoes.”
Joined by his brother Samuel in the schooner Pilgrim, which was
used as a tender in the sealing trade, Amasa Delano frequented
unfamiliar beaches until he had taken his toll of skins and was
ready to bear away for Canton to sell them. There were many
Yankee ships after seals in those early days, enduring more peril
and privation than the whalemen, roving over the South Pacific
among the rock-bound islands unknown to the merchant navigator.
The men sailed wholly on shares, a seaman receiving one per cent
of the catch and the captain ten per cent, and they slaughtered
the seal by the million, driving them from the most favored
haunts within a few years. For instance, American ships first
visited Mas a Fuera in 1797, and Captain Delano estimated that
during the seven years following three million skins were taken
to China from this island alone. He found as many as fourteen
vessels there at one time, and he himself carried away one
hundred thousand skins. It was a gold mine for profit while it
lasted.
There were three Delano brothers afloat in two vessels, and of
their wanderings Amasa set down this epitome: “Almost the whole
of our connections who were left behind had need of our
assistance, and to look forward it was no more than a reasonable
calculation to make that our absence would not be less than three
years . . . together with the extraordinary uncertainty of the
issue of the voyage, as we had nothing but our hands to depend
upon to obtain a cargo which was only to be done through storms,
dangers, and breakers, and taken from barren rocks in distant
regions. But after a voyage of four years for one vessel and five
for the other, we were all permitted to return safe home to our
friends and not quite empty-handed. We had built both of the
vessels we were in and navigated them two and three times around
the globe.” Each one of the brothers had been a master builder
and rigger and a navigator of ships in every part of the world.
By far the most important voyage undertaken by American
merchantmen during the decade of brilliant achievement following
the Revolution was that of Captain Robert Gray in the Columbia,
which was the first ship to visit and explore the northwest coast
and to lead the way for such adventurers as Richard Cleveland and
Amasa Delano. On his second voyage in 1792, Captain Gray
discovered the great river he christened Columbia and so gave to
the United States its valid title to that vast territory which
Lewis and Clark were to find after toiling over the mountains
thirteen years later.
When the first Congress under the new Federal Constitution
assembled in 1789, a spirit of pride was manifested in the swift
recovery and the encouraging growth of the merchant marine,
together with a concerted determination to promote and protect it
by means of national legislation. The most imperative need was a
series of retaliatory measures to meet the burdensome navigation
laws of England, to give American ships a fair field and no
favors. The Atlantic trade was therefore stimulated by allowing a
reduction of ten per cent of the customs duties on goods imported
in vessels built and owned by American citizens. The East India
trade, which already employed forty New England ships, was
fostered in like manner. Teas brought direct under the American
flag paid an average duty of twelve cents a pound while teas in
foreign bottoms were taxed twenty-seven cents. It was sturdy
protection, for on a cargo of one hundred thousand pounds of
assorted teas from India or China, a British ship would pay
$27,800 into the custom house and a Salem square-rigger only
$10,980.
The result was that the valuable direct trade with the Far East
was absolutely secured to the American flag. Not content with
this, Congress decreed a system of tonnage duties which permitted
the native owner to pay six cents per ton on his vessel while the
foreigner laid down fifty cents as an entry fee for every ton his
ship measured, or thirty cents if he owned an American-built
vessel. In 1794, Congress became even more energetic in defense
of its mariners and increased the tariff rates on merchandise in
foreign vessels. A nation at last united, jealous of its rights,
resentful of indignities long suffered, and intelligently alive
to its shipping as the chief bulwark of prosperity, struck back
with peaceful weapons and gained a victory of incalculable
advantage. Its Congress, no longer feeble and divided, laid the
foundations for American greatness upon the high seas which was
to endure for more than a half century. Wars, embargoes, and
confiscations might interrupt but they could not seriously harm
it.
In the three years after 1789 the merchant shipping registered
for the foreign trade increased from 123,893 tons to 411,438
tons, presaging a growth without parallel in the history of the
commercial world. Foreign ships were almost entirely driven out
of American ports, and ninety-one per cent of imports and
eighty-six per cent of exports were conveyed in vessels built and
manned by Americans. Before Congress intervened, English
merchantmen had controlled three-fourths of our commerce
overseas. When Thomas Jefferson, as Secretary of State, fought
down Southern opposition to a retaliatory shipping policy, he
uttered a warning which his countrymen were to find still true
and apt in the twentieth century: “If we have no seamen, our
ships will be useless, consequently our ship timber, iron, and
hemp; our shipbuilding will be at an end; ship carpenters will go
over to other nations; our young men have no call to the sea; our
products, carried in foreign bottoms, will be saddled with
war-freight and insurance in time of war--and the history of the
last hundred years shows that the nation which is our carrier has
three years of war for every four years of peace.”
The steady growth of an American merchant marine was interrupted
only once in the following decade. In the year 1793 war broke out
between England and France. A decree of the National Convention
of the French Republic granted neutral vessels the same rights as
those which flew the tricolor. This privilege reopened a rushing
trade with the West Indies, and hundreds of ships hastened from
American ports to Martinique, Guadeloupe, and St. Lucia.
Like a thunderbolt came the tidings that England refused to look
upon this trade with the French colonies as neutral and that her
cruisers had been told to seize all vessels engaged in it and to
search them for English-born seamen. This ruling was enforced
with such barbarous severity that it seemed as if the War for
Independence had been fought in vain. Without warning, unable to
save themselves, great fleets of Yankee merchantmen were
literally swept from the waters of the West Indies. At St.
Eustatius one hundred and thirty of them were condemned. The
judges at Bermuda condemned eleven more. Crews and passengers
were flung ashore without food or clothing, were abused,
insulted, or perhaps impressed in British privateers. The ships
were lost to their owners. There was no appeal and no redress. At
Martinique an English fleet and army captured St. Pierre in
February, 1794. Files of marines boarded every American ship in
the harbor, tore down the colors, and flung two hundred and fifty
seamen into the foul holds of a prison hulk. There they were
kept, half-dead with thirst and hunger while their vessels,
uncared for, had stranded or sunk at their moorings. Scores of
outrages as abominable as this were on record in the office of
the Secretary of State. Shipmasters were afraid to sail to the
southward and, for lack of these markets for dried cod, the
fishing schooners of Marblehead were idle.
For a time a second war with England seemed imminent. An alarmed
Congress passed laws to create a navy and to fortify the most
important American harbors. President Washington recommended an
embargo of thirty days, which Congress promptly voted and then
extended for thirty more. It was a popular measure and strictly
enforced by the mariners themselves. The mates and captains of
the brigs and snows in the Delaware River met and resolved not to
go to sea for another ten days, swearing to lie idle sooner than
feed the British robbers in the West Indies. It was in the midst
of these demonstrations that Washington seized the one hope of
peace and recommended a special mission to England.
The treaty negotiated by John Jay in 1794 was received with an
outburst of popular indignation. Jay was damned as a traitor,
while the sailors of Portsmouth burned him in effigy. By way of
an answer to the terms of the obnoxious treaty, a seafaring mob
in Boston raided and burned the British privateer Speedwell,
which had put into that port as a merchantman with her guns and
munitions hidden beneath a cargo of West India produce.
The most that can be said of the commercial provisions of the
treaty is that they opened direct trade with the East Indies but
at the price of complete freedom of trade for British shipping in
American ports. It must be said, too, that although the treaty
failed to clear away the gravest cause of hostility--the right of
search and impressment--yet it served to postpone the actual
dash, and during the years in which it was in force American
shipping splendidly prospered, freed of most irksome handicaps.
The quarrel with France had been brewing at the same time and for
similar reasons. Neutral trade with England was under the ban,
and the Yankee shipmaster was in danger of losing his vessel if
he sailed to or from a port under the British flag. It was out of
the frying-pan into the fire, and French privateers welcomed the
excuse to go marauding in the Atlantic and the Caribbean. What it
meant to fight off these greedy cutthroats is told in a newspaper
account of the engagement of Captain Richard Wheatland, who was
homeward bound to Salem in the ship Perseverance in 1799. He was
in the Old Straits of Bahama when a fast schooner came up astern,
showing Spanish colors and carrying a tremendous press of canvas.
Unable to run away from her, Captain Wheatland reported to his
owners:
“We took in steering sails, wore ship, hauled up our courses,
piped all hands to quarters and prepared for action. The schooner
immediately took in sail, hoisted an English Union flag and
passed under our lee at a considerable distance. We wore ship,
she did the same, and we passed each other within half a musket.
A fellow hailed us in broken English and ordered the boat hoisted
out and the captain to come aboard, which he refused. He again
ordered our boat out and enforced his orders with a menace that
in case of refusal he would sink us, using at the same time the
vilest and most infamous language it is possible to conceive of.
. . . We hauled the ship to wind and as he passed poured a whole
broadside into him with great success. Sailing faster than we, he
ranged considerably ahead, tacked and again passed, giving us a
broadside and furious discharge of musketry, which he kept up
incessantly until the latter part of the engagement. His musket
balls reached us in every direction but his large shot either
fell short or went considerably over us while our guns loaded
with round shot and square bars of iron were plied so briskly and
directed with such good judgment that before he got out of range
we had cut his mainsail and foretopsail all to rags and cleared
his decks so effectively that when he bore away from us there
were scarcely ten men to be seen. He then struck his English flag
and hoisted the flag of The Terrible Republic and made off with
all the sail he could carry, much disappointed, no doubt, at not
being able to give us a fraternal embrace. We feel confidence
that we have rid the world of some infamous pests of society.”
By this time, the United States was engaged in active hostilities
with France, although war had not been declared. The news of the
indignities which American commissions had suffered at the hands
of the French Directory had stirred the people to war pitch.
Strong measures for national defense were taken, which stopped
little short of war. The country rallied to the slogan, “Millions
for defense but not one cent for tribute,” and the merchants of
the seaports hastened to subscribe funds to build frigates to be
loaned to the Government. Salem launched the famous Essex, ready
for sea six months after the keel was laid, at a cost of $75,000.
Her two foremost merchants, Elias Hasket Derby and William Gray,
led the list with ten thousand dollars each. The call sent out by
the master builder, Enos Briggs, rings with thrilling effect:
“To Sons of Freedom! All true lovers of Liberty of your Country!
Step forth and give your assistance in building the frigate to
oppose French insolence and piracy. Let every man in possession
of a white oak tree be ambitious to be foremost in hurrying down
the timber to Salem where the noble structure is to be fabricated
to maintain your rights upon the seas and make the name of
America respected among the nations of the world. Your largest
and longest trees are wanted, and the arms of them for knees and
rising timber. Four trees are wanted for the keel which
altogether will measure 146 feet in length, and hew sixteen
inches square.”
This handsome frigate privately built by patriots of the republic
illuminates the coastwise spirit and conditions of her time. She
was a Salem ship from keel to truck. Captain Jonathan Haraden,
the finest privateersman of the Revolution, made the rigging for
the mainmast at his ropewalk in Brown Street. Joseph Vincent
fitted out the foremast and Thomas Briggs the mizzenmast in their
lofts at the foot of the Common. When the huge hemp cables were
ready for the frigate, the workmen carried them to the shipyard
on their shoulders, the parade led by fife and drum. Her sails
were cut from duck woven in Daniel Rust’s factory in Broad Street
and her iron work was forged by Salem shipsmiths. It was not
surprising that Captain Richard Derby was chosen to command the
Essex, but he was abroad in a ship of his own and she sailed
under Captain Edward Preble of the Navy.
The war cloud passed and the merchant argosies overflowed the
wharves and havens of New England, which had ceased to monopolize
the business on blue water. New York had become a seaport with
long ranks of high-steeved bowsprits soaring above pleasant
Battery Park and a forest of spars extending up the East River.
In 1790 more than two thousand ships, brigs, schooners, and
smaller craft had entered and cleared, and the merchants met in
the coffee-houses to discuss charters, bills-of-lading, and
adventures. Sailors commanded thrice the wages of laborers
ashore. Shipyards were increasing and the builders could build as
large and swift East Indiamen as those of which Boston and Salem
boasted.
Philadelphia had her Stephen Girard, whose wealth was earned in
ships, a man most remarkable and eccentric, whose career was one
of the great maritime romances. Though his father was a
prosperous merchant of Bordeaux engaged in the West India trade,
he was shifting for himself as a cabin-boy on his father’s ships
when only fourteen years old. With no schooling, barely able to
read and write, this urchin sailed between Bordeaux and the
French West Indies for nine years, until he gained the rank of
first mate. At the age of twenty-six he entered the port of
Philadelphia in command of a sloop which had narrowly escaped
capture by British frigates. There he took up his domicile and
laid the foundation of his fortune in small trading ventures to
New Orleans and Santo Domingo.
In 1791 he began to build a fleet of beautiful ships for the
China and India trade, their names, Montesquieu, Helvetius,
Voltaire, and Rousseau, revealing his ideas of religion and
liberty. So successfully did he combine banking and shipping that
in 1813 he was believed to be the wealthiest merchant in the
United States. In that year one of his ships from China was
captured off the Capes of the Delaware by a British privateer.
Her cargo of teas, nankeens, and silks was worth half a million
dollars to him but he succeeded in ransoming it on the spot by
counting out one hundred and eighty thousand Spanish milled
dollars. No privateersman could resist such strategy as this.
Alone in his old age, without a friend or relative to close his
eyes in death, Stephen Girard, once a penniless, ignorant French
cabin-boy, bequeathed his millions to philanthropy, and the
Girard College for orphan boys, in Philadelphia, is his monument.
The Treaty of Amiens brought a little respite to Europe and a
peaceful interlude for American shipmasters, but France and
England came to grips again in 1803. For two years thereafter the
United States was almost the only important neutral nation not
involved in the welter of conflict on land and sea, and trade
everywhere sought the protection of the Stars and Stripes.
England had swept her own rivals, men-of-war and merchantmen,
from the face of the waters. France and Holland ceased to carry
cargoes beneath their own ensigns. Spain was afraid to send her
galleons to Mexico and Peru. All the Continental ports were
begging for American ships to transport their merchandise. It was
a maritime harvest unique and unexpected.
Yankee skippers were dominating the sugar trade of Cuba and were
rolling across the Atlantic with the coffee, hides, and indigo of
Venezuela and Brazil. Their fleets crowded the roadsteads of
Manila and Batavia and packed the warehouses of Antwerp, Lisbon,
and Hamburg. It was a situation which England could not tolerate
without attempting to thwart an immense traffic which she
construed as giving aid and comfort to her enemies. Under cover
of the so-called Rule of 1756 British admiralty courts began to
condemn American vessels carrying products from enemies’ colonies
to Europe, even when the voyage was broken by first entering an
American port. It was on record in September, 1805, that fifty
American ships had been condemned in England and as many more in
the British West Indies.
This was a trifling disaster, however, compared with the huge
calamity which befell when Napoleon entered Berlin as a conqueror
and proclaimed his paper blockade of the British Isles. There was
no French navy to enforce it, but American vessels dared not sail
for England lest they be snapped up by French privateers. The
British Government savagely retaliated with further prohibitions,
and Napoleon countered in like manner until no sea was safe for a
neutral ship and the United States was powerless to assert its
rights. Thomas Jefferson as President used as a weapon the
Embargo of 1807, which was, at first, a popular measure, and
which he justified in these pregnant sentences: “The whole world
is thus laid under interdict by these two nations, and our own
vessels, their cargoes, and crews, are to be taken by the one or
the other for whatever place they may be destined out of our
limits. If, therefore, on leaving our harbors we are certainly to
lose them, is it not better as to vessels, cargoes, and seamen,
to keep them at home?”
A people proud, independent, and pugnacious, could not long
submit to a measure of defense which was, in the final sense, an
abject surrender to brute force. New England, which bore the
brunt of the embargo, was first to rebel against it. Sailors
marched through the streets clamoring for bread or loaded their
vessels and fought their way to sea. In New York the streets of
the waterside were deserted, ships dismantled, countinghouses
unoccupied, and warehouses empty. In one year foreign commerce
decreased in value from $108,000,000 to $22,000,000.
After fifteen months Congress repealed the law, substituting a
Non-Intercourse Act which suspended trade with Great Britain and
France until their offending orders were repealed. All such
measures were doomed to be futile. Words and documents, threats
and arguments could not intimidate adversaries who paid heed to
nothing else than broadsides from line-of-battle ships or the
charge of battalions. With other countries trade could now be
opened. Hopefully the hundreds of American ships long pent-up in
harbor winged it deep-laden for the Baltic, the North Sea, and
the Mediterranean. But few of them ever returned. Like a brigand,
Napoleon lured them into a trap and closed it, advising the
Prussian Government, which was under his heel: “Let the American
ships enter your ports. Seize them afterward. You shall deliver
the cargoes to me and I will take them in part payment of the
Prussian war debt.”
Similar orders were executed wherever his mailed fist reached,
the pretext being reprisal for the Non-Intercourse Act. More than
two hundred American vessels were lost to their owners, a
ten-million-dollar robbery for which France paid an indemnity of
five millions after twenty years. It was the grand climax of the
exploitation which American commerce had been compelled to endure
through two centuries of tumult and bloodshed afloat. There
lingers today in many a coastwise town an inherited dislike for
France. It is a legacy of that far-off catastrophe which beggared
many a household and filled the streets with haggard, broken
shipmasters.
It was said of this virile merchant marine that it throve under
pillage and challenged confiscation. Statistics confirm this
brave paradox. In 1810, while Napoleon was doing his worst, the
deep-sea tonnage amounted to 981,019; and it is a singular fact
that in proportion to population this was to stand as the high
tide of American foreign shipping until thirty-seven years later.
It ebbed during the War of 1812 but rose again with peace and a
real and lasting freedom of the seas.
This second war with England was fought in behalf of merchant
seamen and they played a nobly active part in it. The ruthless
impressment of seamen was the most conspicuous provocation, but
it was only one of many. Two years before hostilities were openly
declared, British frigates were virtually blockading the port of
New York, halting and searching ships as they pleased, making
prizes of those with French destinations, stealing sailors to
fill their crews, waging war in everything but name, and enjoying
the sport of it. A midshipman of one of them merrily related:
"Every morning at daybreak we set about arresting the progress of
all the vessels we saw, firing off guns to the right and left to
make every ship that was running in heave to or wait until we had
leisure to send a boat on board to see, in our lingo, what she
was made of. I have frequently known a dozen and sometimes a
couple of dozen ships lying a league or two off the port, losing
their fair wind, their tide, and worse than all, their market for
many hours, sometimes the whole day, before our search was
completed.”
The right of a belligerent to search neutral vessels for
contraband of war or evidence of a forbidden destination was not
the issue at stake. This was a usage sanctioned by such
international law as then existed. It was the alleged right to
search for English seamen in neutral vessels that Great Britain
exercised, not only on the high seas but even in territorial
waters, which the American Government refused to recognize. In
vain the Government had endeavored to protect its sailors from
impressment by means of certificates of birth and citizenship.
These documents were jeered at by the English naval lieutenant
and his boarding gang, who kidnapped from the forecastle such
stalwart tars as pleased their fancy. The victim who sought to
inform an American consul of his plight was lashed to the rigging
and flogged by a boatswain’s mate. The files of the State
Department, in 1807, had contained the names of six thousand
American sailors who were as much slaves and prisoners aboard
British men-of-war as if they had been made captives by the Dey
of Algiers. One of these incidents, occurring on the ship Betsy,
Captain Nathaniel Silsbee, while at Madras in 1795, will serve to
show how this brutal business was done.
“I received a note early one morning from my chief mate that one
of my sailors, Edward Hulen, a fellow townsman whom I had known
from boyhood, had been impressed and taken on board of a British
frigate then being in port .... I immediately went on board my
ship and having there learned all the facts in the case,
proceeded to the frigate, where I found Hulen and in his presence
was informed by the first lieutenant of the frigate that he had
taken Hulen from my ship under a peremptory order from his
commander to visit every American ship in port and take from each
of them one or more of their seamen .... I then called upon
Captain Cook, who commanded the frigate, and sought first by all
the persuasive means that I was capable of using and ultimately
by threats to appeal to the Government of the place to obtain
Hulen’s release, but in vain . . . . It remained for me only to
recommend Hulen to that protection of the lieutenant which a good
seaman deserves, and to submit to the high-handed insult thus
offered to the flag of my country which I had no means either of
preventing or resisting.”
After several years’ detention in the British Navy, Hulen
returned to Salem and lived to serve on board privateers in the
second war with England.
Several years’ detention! This was what it meant to be a pressed
man, perhaps with wife and children at home who had no news of
him nor any wages to support them. At the time of the Nore Mutiny
in 1797, there were ships in the British fleet whose men had not
been paid off for eight, ten, twelve, and in one instance fifteen
years. These wooden walls of England were floating hells, and a
seaman was far better off in jail. He was flogged if he sulked
and again if he smiled flogged until the blood ran for a hundred
offenses as trivial as these. His food was unspeakably bad and
often years passed before he was allowed to set foot ashore.
Decent men refused to volunteer and the ships were filled with
the human scum and refuse caught in the nets of the press-gangs
of Liverpool, London, and Bristol.
It is largely forgotten or unknown that this system of recruiting
was as intolerable in England as it was in the United States and
as fiercely resented. Oppressive and unjust, it was nevertheless
endured as the bulwark of England’s defense against her foes. It
ground under its heel the very people it protected and made them
serfs in order to keep them free. No man of the common people who
lived near the coast of England was safe from the ruffianly
press-gangs nor any merchant ship that entered her ports. It was
the most cruel form of conscription ever devised. Mob violence
opposed it again and again, and British East Indiamen fought the
King’s tenders sooner than be stripped of their crews and left
helpless. Feeling in America against impressment was never more
highly inflamed, even on the brink of the War of 1812, than it
had long been in England itself, although the latter country was
unable to rise and throw it off. Here are the words, not of an
angry American patriot but of a modern English historian writing
of his own nation:* “To the people the impress was an axe laid at
the foot of the tree. There was here no question, as with trade,
of the mere loss of hands who could be replaced. Attacking the
family in the person of its natural supporter and protector, the
octopus system of which the gangs were the tentacles, struck at
the very foundations of domestic life and brought to thousands of
households a poverty as bitter and a grief as poignant as death.
. . . The mutiny at the Nore brought the people face to face with
the appalling risks attendant on wholesale pressing while the war
with America, incurred for the sole purpose of upholding the
right to press, taught them the lengths to which their rulers
were still prepared to go in order to enslave them."*
* The Press Gang Afloat and Ashore, by J. R. Hutchinson.
American privateering in 1812 was even bolder and more successful
than during the Revolution. It was the work of a race of merchant
seamen who had found themselves, who were in the forefront of the
world’s trade and commerce, and who were equipped to challenge
the enemy’s pretensions to supremacy afloat. Once more there was
a mere shadow of a navy to protect them, but they had learned to
trust their own resources. They would send to sea fewer of the
small craft, slow and poorly armed, and likely to meet disaster.
They were capable of manning what was, in fact, a private navy
comprised of fast and formidable cruisers. The intervening
generation had advanced the art of building and handling ships
beyond all rivalry, and England grudgingly acknowledged their
ability. The year of 1812 was indeed but a little distance from
the resplendent modern era of the Atlantic packet and the Cape
Horn clipper.
Already these Yankee deep-water ships could be recognized afar by
their lofty spars and snowy clouds of cotton duck beneath which
the slender hull was a thin black line. Far up to the gleaming
royals they carried sail in winds so strong that the lumbering
English East Indiamen were hove to or snugged down to reefed
topsails. It was not recklessness but better seamanship. The
deeds of the Yankee privateers of 1812 prove this assertion to
the hilt. Their total booty amounted to thirteen hundred prizes
taken over all the Seven Seas, with a loss to England of forty
million dollars in ships and cargoes. There were, all told, more
than five hundred of them in commission, but New England no
longer monopolized this dashing trade. Instead of Salem it was
Baltimore that furnished the largest fleet--fifty-eight vessels,
many of them the fast ships and schooners which were to make the
port famous as the home of the Baltimore clipper model. All down
the coast, out of Norfolk, Wilmington, Charleston, Savannah, and
New Orleans, sallied the privateers to show that theirs was, in
truth, a seafaring nation ardently united in a common cause.
Again and more vehemently the people of England raised their
voices in protest and lament, for these saucy sea-raiders fairly
romped to and fro in the Channel, careless of pursuit, conducting
a blockade of their own until London was paying the famine price
of fifty-eight dollars a barrel for flour, and it was publicly
declared mortifying and distressing that “a horde of American
cruisers should be allowed, unresisted and unmolested, to take,
burn, or sink our own vessels in our own inlets and almost in
sight of our own harbors.” It was Captain Thomas Boyle in the
Chasseur of Baltimore who impudently sent ashore his proclamation
of a blockade of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland,
which he requested should be posted in Lloyd’s Coffee House.
A wonderfully fine figure of a fighting seaman was this Captain
Boyle, with an Irish sense of humor which led him to haunt the
enemy’s coast and to make sport of the frigates which tried to
catch him. His Chasseur was considered one of the ablest
privateers of the war and the most beautiful vessel ever seen in
Baltimore. A fleet and graceful schooner with a magical turn for
speed, she mounted sixteen long twelve-pounders and carried a
hundred officers, seamen, and marines, and was never outsailed in
fair winds or foul. “Out of sheer wantonness,” said an admirer,
"she sometimes affected to chase the enemy’s men-of-war of far
superior force.” Once when surrounded by two frigates and two
naval brigs, she slipped through and was gone like a phantom.
During his first cruise in the Chasseur, Captain Boyle captured
eighteen valuable merchantmen. It was such defiant rovers as he
that provoked the “Morning Chronicle” of London to splutter “that
the whole coast of Ireland from Wexford round by Cape Clear
to Carrickfergus, should have been for above a month under the
unresisted domination of a few petty fly-by-nights from the
blockaded ports of the United States is a grievance equally
intolerable and disgraceful.”
This was when the schooner Syren had captured His Majesty’s
cutter Landrail while crossing the Irish Sea with dispatches;
when the Governor Tompkins burned fourteen English vessels in the
English Channel in quick succession; when the Harpy of Baltimore
cruised for three months off the Irish and English coasts and in
the Bay of Biscay, and returned to Boston filled with spoils,
including a half million dollars of money; when the Prince de
Neuchatel hovered at her leisure in the Irish Channel and made
coasting trade impossible; and when the Young Wasp of
Philadelphia cruised for six months in those same waters.
Two of the privateers mentioned were first-class fighting ships
whose engagements were as notable, in their way, as those of the
American frigates which made the war as illustrious by sea as it
was ignominious by land. While off Havana in 1815, Captain Boyle
met the schooner St. Lawrence of the British Navy, a fair match
in men and guns. The Chasseur could easily have run away but
stood up to it and shot the enemy to pieces in fifteen minutes.
Brave and courteous were these two commanders, and Lieutenant
Gordon of the St. Lawrence gave his captor a letter which read,
in part: “In the event of Captain Boyle’s becoming a prisoner of
war to any British cruiser I consider it a tribute justly due to
his humane and generous treatment of myself, the surviving
officers, and crew of His Majesty’s late schooner St. Lawrence,
to state that his obliging attention and watchful solicitude to
preserve our effects and render us comfortable during the short
time we were in his possession were such as justly entitle him to
the indulgence and respect of every British subject.”
The Prince de Neuchatel had the honor of beating off the attack
of a forty-gun British frigate--an exploit second only to that of
the General Armstrong in the harbor of Fayal. This privateer with
a foreign name hailed from New York and was so fortunate as to
capture for her owners three million dollars’ worth of British
merchandise. With Captain J. Ordronaux on the quarterdeck, she
was near Nantucket Shoals at noon on October 11, 1814, when a
strange sail was discovered. As this vessel promptly gave chase,
Captain Ordronaux guessed-and as events proved correctly--that
she must be a British frigate. She turned out to be the Endymion.
The privateer had in tow a prize which she was anxious to get
into port, but she was forced to cast off the hawser late in the
afternoon and make every effort to escape.
The breeze died with the sun and the vessels were close inshore.
Becalmed, the privateer and the frigate anchored a quarter of a
mile apart. Captain Ordronaux might have put his crew on the
beach in boats and abandoned his ship. This was the reasonable
course, for, as he had sent in several prize crews, he was
short-handed and could muster no more than thirty-seven men and
boys. The Endymion, on the other hand, had a complement of three
hundred and fifty sailors and marines, and in size and fighting
power she was in the class of the American frigates President and
Constitution. Quite unreasonably, however, the master of the
privateer decided to await events.
The unexpected occurred shortly after dusk when several boats
loaded to the gunwales with a boarding party crept away from the
frigate. Five of them, with one hundred and twenty men, made a
concerted attack at different points, alongside and under the bow
and stern. Captain Ordronaux had told his crew that he would blow
up the ship with all hands before striking his colors, and they
believed him implicitly. This was the hero who was described as
"a Jew by persuasion, a Frenchman by birth, an American for
convenience, and so diminutive in stature as to make him appear
ridiculous, in the eyes of others, even for him to enforce
authority among a hardy, weatherbeaten crew should they do aught
against his will.” He was big enough, nevertheless, for this
night’s bloody work, and there was no doubt about his authority.
While the British tried to climb over the bulwarks, his
thirty-seven men and boys fought like raging devils, with knives,
pistols, cutlases, with their bare fists and their teeth. A few
of the enemy gained the deck, but the privateersmen turned and
killed them. Others leaped aboard and were gradually driving the
Americans back, when the skipper ran to the hatch above the
powder magazine, waving a lighted match and swearing to drop it
in if his crew retreated one step further. Either way the issue
seemed desperate. But again they took their skipper’s word for it
and rallied for a bloody struggle which soon swept the decks.
No more than twenty minutes had passed and the battle was won.
The enemy was begging for quarter. One boat had been sunk, three
had drifted away filled with dead and wounded, and the fifth was
captured with thirty-six men in it of whom only eight were
unhurt. The American loss was seven killed and twenty-four
wounded, or thirty-one of her crew of thirty-seven. Yet they had
not given up the ship. The frigate Endymion concluded that once
was enough, and next morning the Prince de Neuchatel bore away
for Boston with a freshening breeze.
Those were merchant seamen also who held the General Armstrong
against a British squadron through that moonlit night in Fayal
Roads, inflicting heavier losses than were suffered in any naval
action of the war. It is a story Homeric, almost incredible in
its details and so often repeated that it can be only touched
upon in this brief chronicle. The leader was a kindly featured
man who wore a tall hat, side-whiskers, and a tail coat. His
portrait might easily have served for that of a New England
deacon of the old school. No trace of the swashbuckler in this
Captain Samuel Reid, who had been a thrifty, respected merchant
skipper until offered the command of a privateer.
Touching at the Azores for water and provisions in September,
1814, he was trapped in port by the great seventy-four-gun ship
of the line Plantagenet, the thirty-eight-gun frigate Rota, and
the warbrig Carnation. Though he was in neutral water, they paid
no heed to this but determined to destroy a Yankee schooner which
had played havoc with their shipping. Four hundred men in twelve
boats, with a howitzer in the bow of each boat, were sent against
the General Armstrong in one flotilla. But not a man of the four
hundred gained her deck. Said an eyewitness: “The Americans
fought with great firmness but more like bloodthirsty savages
than anything else. They rushed into the boats sword in hand and
put every soul to death as far as came within their power. Some
of the boats were left without a single man to row them, others
with three or four. The most that any one returned with was about
ten. Several boats floated ashore full of dead bodies . . . . For
three days after the battle we were employed in burying the dead
that washed on shore in the surf.”
This tragedy cost the British squadron one hundred and twenty men
in killed and one hundred and thirty in wounded, while Captain
Reid lost only two dead and had seven wounded. He was compelled
to retreat ashore next day when the ships stood in to sink his
schooner with their big guns, but the honors of war belonged to
him and well-earned were the popular tributes when he saw home
again, nor was there a word too much in the florid toast:
"Captain Reid--his valor has shed a blaze of renown upon the
character of our seamen, and won for himself a laurel of eternal
bloom.”
It is not to glorify war nor to rekindle an ancient feud that
such episodes as these are recalled to mind. These men, and
others like them, did their duty as it came to them, and they
were sailors of whom the whole Anglo-Saxon race might be proud.
In the crisis they were Americans, not privateersmen in quest of
plunder, and they would gladly die sooner than haul down the
Stars and Stripes. The England against which they fought was not
the England of today. Their honest grievances, inflicted by a
Government too intent upon crushing Napoleon to be fair to
neutrals, have long ago been obliterated. This War of 1812
cleared the vision of the Mother Country and forever taught her
Government that the people of the Republic were, in truth, free
and independent.
This lesson was driven home not only by the guns of the
Constitution and the United States, but also by the hundreds of
privateers and the forty thousand able seamen who were eager to
sail in them. They found no great place in naval history, but
England knew their prowess and respected it. Every schoolboy is
familiar with the duels of the Wasp and the Frolic, of the
Enterprise and the Boxer; but how many people know what happened
when the privateer Decatur met and whipped the Dominica of the
British Navy to the southward of Bermuda?
Captain Diron was the man who did it as he was cruising out of
Charleston, South Carolina, in the summer of 1813. Sighting an
armed schooner slightly heavier than his own vessel, he made for
her and was unperturbed when the royal ensign streamed from her
gaff. Clearing for action, he closed the hatches so that none of
his men could hide below. The two schooners fought in the veiling
smoke until the American could ram her bowsprit over the other’s
stern and pour her whole crew aboard. In the confined space of
the deck, almost two hundred men and lads were slashing and
stabbing and shooting amid yells and huzzas. Lieutenant Barrette,
the English commander, only twenty-five years old, was mortally
hurt and every other officer, excepting the surgeon and one
midshipman, was killed or wounded. Two-thirds of the crew were
down but still they refused to surrender, and Captain Diron had
to pull down the colors with his own hands. Better discipline and
marksmanship had won the day for him and his losses were
comparatively small.
Men of his description were apt to think first of glory and let
the profits go hang, for there was no cargo to be looted in a
King’s ship. Other privateersmen, however, were not so valiant or
quarrelsome, and there was many a one tied up in London River or
the Mersey which had been captured without very savage
resistance. Yet on the whole it is fair to say that the private
armed ships outfought and outsailed the enemy as impressively as
did the few frigates of the American Navy.
There was a class of them which exemplified the rapid development
of the merchant marine in a conspicuous manner--large commerce
destroyers too swift to be caught, too powerful to fear the
smaller cruisers. They were extremely profitable business
ventures, entrusted to the command of the most audacious and
skillful masters that could be engaged. Of this type was the ship
America of Salem, owned by the Crowninshields, which made
twenty-six prizes and brought safely into port property which
realized more than a million dollars. Of this the owners and
shareholders received six hundred thousand dollars as dividends.
She was a stately vessel, built for the East India trade, and was
generally conceded to be the fastest privateer afloat. For this
service the upper deck was removed and the sides were filled in
with stout oak timber as an armored protection, and longer yards
and royal masts gave her a huge area of sail. Her crew of one
hundred and fifty men had the exacting organization of a
man-of-war, including, it is interesting to note, three
lieutenants, three mates, a sailingmaster, surgeon, purser,
captain of marines, gunners, seven prize masters, armorer,
drummer, and a fifer. Discipline was severe, and flogging was the
penalty for breaking the regulations.
During her four cruises, the America swooped among the plodding
merchantmen like a falcon on a dovecote, the sight of her
frightening most of her prey into submission, with a brush now
and then to exercise the crews of the twenty-two guns, and
perhaps a man or two hit. Long after the war, Captain James
Chever, again a peaceful merchant mariner, met at Valparaiso, Sir
James Thompson, commander of the British frigate Dublin, which
had been fitted out in 1813 for the special purpose of chasing
the America. In the course of a cordial chat between the two
captains the Briton remarked:
“I was once almost within gun-shot of that infernal Yankee
skimming-dish, just as night came on. By daylight she had
outsailed the Dublin so devilish fast that she was no more than a
speck on the horizon. By the way, I wonder if you happen to know
the name of the beggar that was master of her.”
“I’m the beggar,” chuckled Captain Chever, and they drank each
other’s health on the strength of it.
Although the Treaty of Ghent omitted mention of the impressment
of sailors, which had been the burning issue of the war, there
were no more offenses of this kind. American seafarers were safe
against kidnapping on their own decks, and they had won this
security by virtue of their own double-shotted guns. At the same
time England lifted the curse of the press-gang from her own
people, who refused longer to endure it.
There seemed no reason why the two nations, having finally fought
their differences to a finish, should not share the high seas in
peaceful rivalry; but the irritating problems of protection and
reciprocity survived to plague and hamper commerce. It was
difficult for England to overcome the habit of guarding her trade
against foreign invasion. Agreeing with the United States to
waive all discriminating duties between the ports of the two
countries--this was as much as she was at that time willing to
yield. She still insisted upon regulating the trade of her West
Indies and Canada. American East Indiamen were to be limited to
direct voyages and could not bring cargoes to Europe. Though this
discrimination angered Congress, to which it appeared as lopsided
reciprocity, the old duties were nevertheless repealed; and then,
presto! the British colonial policy of exclusion was enforced and
eighty thousand tons of American shipping became idle because the
West India market was closed.
There followed several years of unhappy wrangling, a revival of
the old smuggling spirit, the risk of seizure and confiscations,
and shipping merchants with long faces talking ruin. The theory
of free trade versus protection was as debatable and opinions
were as conflicting then as now. Some were for retaliation,
others for conciliation; and meanwhile American shipmasters went
about their business, with no room for theories in their honest
heads, and secured more and more of the world’s trade. Curiously
enough, the cries of calamity in the United States were echoed
across the water, where the “London Times” lugubriously
exclaimed: “The shipping interest, the cradle of our navy, is
half ruined. Our commercial monopoly exists no longer; and
thousands of our manufacturers are starving or seeking redemption
in distant lands. We have closed the Western Indies against
America from feelings of commercial rivalry. Its active seamen
have already engrossed an important branch of our carrying trade
to the Eastern Indies. Her starred flag is now conspicuous on
every sea and will soon defy our thunder.”
It was not until 1849 that Great Britain threw overboard her long
catalogue of protective navigation laws which had been piling up
since the time of Cromwell, and declared for free trade afloat.
Meanwhile the United States had drifted in the same direction,
barring foreign flags from its coastwise shipping but offering
full exemption from all discriminating duties and tonnage duties
to every maritime nation which should respond in like manner.
This latter legislation was enacted in 1828 and definitely
abandoned the doctrine of protection in so far as it applied to
American ships and sailors. For a generation thereafter, during
which ocean rivalry was a battle royal of industry, enterprise,
and skill, the United States was paramount and her merchant
marine attained its greatest successes.
There is one school of modern economists who hold that the seeds
of decay and downfall were planted by this adoption of free trade
in 1828, while another faction of gentlemen quite as estimable
and authoritative will quote facts and figures by the ream to
prove that governmental policies had nothing whatever to do with
the case. These adversaries have written and are still writing
many volumes in which they almost invariably lose their tempers.
Partisan politics befog the tariff issue afloat as well as
ashore, and one’s course is not easy to chart. It is
indisputable, however, that so long as Yankee ships were better,
faster, and more economically managed, they won a commanding
share of the world’s trade. When they ceased to enjoy these
qualities of superiority, they lost the trade and suffered for
lack of protection to overcome the handicap.
The War of 1812 was the dividing line between two eras of salt
water history. On the farther side lay the turbulent centuries of
hazard and bloodshed and piracy, of little ships and indomitable
seamen who pursued their voyages in the reek of gunpowder and of
legalized pillage by the stronger, and of merchant adventurers
who explored new markets wherever there was water enough to float
their keels. They belonged to the rude and lusty youth of a world
which lived by the sword and which gloried in action. Even into
the early years of the nineteenth century these mariners still
sailed--Elizabethan in deed and spirit.
On the hither side of 1812 were seas unvexed by the privateer and
the freebooter. The lateen-rigged corsairs had been banished from
their lairs in the harbors of Algiers, and ships needed to show
no broadsides of cannon in the Atlantic trade. For a time they
carried the old armament among the lawless islands of the Orient
and off Spanish-American coasts where the vocation of piracy made
its last stand, but the great trade routes of the globe were
peaceful highways for the white-winged fleets of all nations. The
American seamen who had fought for the right to use the open sea
were now to display their prowess in another way and in a romance
of achievement that was no less large and thrilling.
It was on the stormy Atlantic, called by sailormen the Western
Ocean, that the packet ships won the first great contest for
supremacy and knew no rivals until the coming of the age of steam
made them obsolete. Their era antedated that of the clipper and
was wholly distinct. The Atlantic packet was the earliest liner:
she made regular sailings and carried freight and passengers
instead of trading on her owners’ account as was the ancient
custom. Not for her the tranquillity of tropic seas and the
breath of the Pacific trades, but an almost incessant battle with
swinging surges and boisterous winds, for she was driven harder
in all weathers and seasons than any other ships that sailed. In
such battering service as this the lines of the clipper were too
extremely fine, her spars too tall and slender. The packet was by
no means slow and if the list of her record passages was superb,
it was because they were accomplished by masters who would sooner
let a sail blow away than take it in and who raced each other
every inch of the way.
They were small ships of three hundred to five hundred tons when
the famous Black Ball Line was started in 1816. From the first
they were the ablest vessels that could be built, full-bodied and
stoutly rigged. They were the only regular means of communication
between the United States and Europe and were entrusted with the
mails, specie, government dispatches, and the lives of eminent
personages. Blow high, blow low, one of the Black Ball packets
sailed from New York for Liverpool on the first and sixteenth of
every month. Other lines were soon competing--the Red Star and
the Swallow Tail out of New York, and fine ships from Boston and
Philadelphia. With the completion of the Erie Canal in 1825 the
commercial greatness of New York was assured, and her Atlantic
packets increased in size and numbers, averaging a thousand tons
each in the zenith of their glory.
England, frankly confessing herself beaten and unable to compete
with such ships as these, changed her attitude from hostility to
open admiration. She surrendered the Atlantic packet trade to
American enterprise, and British merchantmen sought their gains
in other waters. The Navigation Laws still protected their
commerce in the Far East and they were content to jog at a more
sedate gait than these weltering packets whose skippers were
striving for passages of a fortnight, with the forecastle doors
nailed fast and the crew compelled to stay on deck from Sandy
Hook to Fastnet Rock.
No blustering, rum-drinking tarpaulin was the captain who sailed
the Independence, the Ocean Queen, or the Dreadnought but a man
very careful of his manners and his dress, who had been selected
from the most highly educated merchant service in the world. He
was attentive to the comfort of his passengers and was presumed
to have no other duties on deck than to give the proper orders to
his first officer and work out his daily reckoning. It was an
exacting, nerve-racking ordeal, however, demanding a sleepless
vigilance, courage, and cool judgment of the first order. The
compensations were large. As a rule, he owned a share of the ship
and received a percentage of the freights and passage money. His
rank when ashore was more exalted than can be conveyed in mere
words. Any normal New York boy would sooner have been captain of
a Black Ball packet than President of the United States, and he
knew by heart the roaring chantey
    It is of a flash packet,
      A packet of fame.
    She is bound to New York
      And the Dreadnought’s her name.
    She is bound to the west’ard
      Where the stormy winds blow.
    Bound away to the west’ard,
      Good Lord, let her go.
There were never more than fifty of these ships afloat, a
trifling fraction of the American deep-water tonnage of that day,
but the laurels they won were immortal. Not only did the English
mariner doff his hat to them, but a Parliamentary committee
reported in 1837 that “the American ships frequenting the ports
of England are stated by several witnesses to be superior to
those of a similar class among the ships of Great Britain, the
commanders and officers being generally considered to be more
competent as seamen and navigators and more uniformly persons of
education than the commanders and officers of British ships of a
similar size and class trading from England to America.”
It was no longer a rivalry with the flags of other nations but an
unceasing series of contests among the packets of the several
lines, and their records aroused far more popular excitement than
when the great steamers of this century were chipping off the
minutes, at an enormous coal consumption, toward a five-day
passage. Theirs were tests of real seamanship, and there were few
disasters. The packet captain scorned a towboat to haul him into
the stream if the wind served fair to set all plain sail as his
ship lay at her wharf. Driving her stern foremost, he braced his
yards and swung her head to sea, clothing the masts with soaring
canvas amid the farewell cheers of the crowds which lined the
waterfront.
A typical match race was sailed between the Black Ball liner
Columbus, Captain De Peyster, and the Sheridan, Captain Russell,
of the splendid Dramatic fleet, in 1837. The stake was $10,000 a
side, put up by the owners and their friends. The crews were
picked men who were promised a bonus of fifty dollars each for
winning. The ships sailed side by side in February, facing the
wild winter passage, and the Columbus reached Liverpool in the
remarkable time of sixteen days, two days ahead of the Sheridan.
The crack packets were never able to reel off more than twelve or
fourteen knots under the most favorable conditions, but they were
kept going night and day, and some of them maintained their
schedules almost with the regularity of the early steamers. The
Montezuma, the Patrick Henry, and the Southampton crossed from
New York to Liverpool in fifteen days, and for years the
Independence held the record of fourteen days and six hours. It
remained for the Dreadnought, Captain Samuel Samuels, in 1859, to
set the mark for packet ships to Liverpool at thirteen days and
eight hours.
Meanwhile the era of the matchless clipper had arrived and it was
one of these ships which achieved the fastest Atlantic passage
ever made by a vessel under sail. The James Baines was built for
English owners to be used in the Australian trade. She was a full
clipper of 2515 tons, twice the size of the ablest packets, and
was praised as “the most perfect sailing ship that ever entered
the river Mersey.” Bound out from Boston to Liverpool, she
anchored after twelve days and six hours at sea.
There was no lucky chance in this extraordinary voyage, for this
clipper was the work of the greatest American builder, Donald
McKay, who at the same time designed the Lightning for the same
owners. This clipper, sent across the Atlantic on her maiden
trip, left in her foaming wake a twenty-four hour run which no
steamer had even approached and which was not equaled by the
fastest express steamers until twenty-five years later when the
greyhound Arizona ran eighteen knots in one hour on her trial
trip. This is a rather startling statement when one reflects that
the Arizona of the Guion line seems to a generation still living
a modern steamer and record-holder. It is even more impressive
when coupled with the fact that, of the innumerable passenger
steamers traversing the seas today, only a few are capable of a
speed of more than eighteen knots.
This clipper Lightning did her 436 sea miles in one day, or
eighteen and a half knots, better than twenty land miles an hour,
and this is how the surpassing feat was entered in her log, or
official journal: “March 1. Wind south. Strong gales; bore away
for the North Channel, carrying away the foretopsail and lost
jib; hove the log several times and found the ship going through
the water at the rate of 18 to 18 1/2 knots; lee rail under water
and rigging slack. Distance run in twenty-four hours, 436 miles."
The passage was remarkably fast, thirteen days and nineteen and a
half hours from Boston Light, but the spectacular feature was
this day’s work. It is a fitting memorial of the Yankee clipper,
and, save only a cathedral, the loveliest, noblest fabric ever
wrought by man’s handiwork.
The clipper, however, was a stranger in the Atlantic and her
chosen courses were elsewhere. The records made by the James
Baines and the Lightning were no discredit to the stanch,
unconquerable packet ships which, year in and year out, held
their own with the steamer lines until just before the Civil War.
It was the boast of Captain Samuels that on her first voyage in
1853 the Dreadnought reached Sandy Hook as the Cunarder Canada,
which had left Liverpool a day ahead of her, was passing in by
Boston Light. Twice she carried the latest news to Europe, and
many seasoned travelers preferred her to the mail steamers.
The masters and officers who handled these ships with such
magnificent success were true-blue American seamen, inspired by
the finest traditions, successors of the privateersmen of 1812.
The forecastles, however, were filled with English, Irish, and
Scandinavians. American lads shunned these ships and, in fact,
the ambitious youngster of the coastwise towns began to cease
following the sea almost a century ago. It is sometimes forgotten
that the period during which the best American manhood sought a
maritime career lay between the Revolution and the War of 1812.
Thereafter the story became more and more one of American ships
and less of American sailors, excepting on the quarter-deck.
In later years the Yankee crews were to be found in the ports
where the old customs survived, the long trading voyage, the
community of interest in cabin and forecastle, all friends and
neighbors together, with opportunities for profit and
advancement. Such an instance was that of the Salem ship George,
built at Salem in 1814 and owned by the great merchant, Joseph
Peabody. For twenty-two years she sailed in the East India trade,
making twenty-one round voyages, with an astonishing regularity
which would be creditable for a modern cargo tramp. Her sailors
were native-born, seldom more than twenty-one years old, and most
of them were studying navigation. Forty-five of them became
shipmasters, twenty of them chief mates, and six second mates.
This reliable George was, in short, a nautical training-school of
the best kind and any young seaman with the right stuff in him
was sure of advancement.
Seven thousand sailors signed articles in the counting-room of
Joseph Peabody and went to sea in his eighty ships which flew the
house-flag in Calcutta, Canton, Sumatra, and the ports of Europe
until 1844. These were mostly New England boys who followed in
the footsteps of their fathers because deep-water voyages were
still “adventures” and a career was possible under a system which
was both congenial and paternal. Brutal treatment was the rare
exception. Flogging still survived in the merchant service and
was defended by captains otherwise humane, but a skipper, no
matter how short-tempered, would be unlikely to abuse a youth
whose parents might live on the same street with him and attend
the same church.
The Atlantic packets brought a different order of things, which
was to be continued through the clipper era. Yankee sailors
showed no love for the cold and storms of the Western Ocean in
these foaming packets which were remorselessly driven for speed.
The masters therefore took what they could get. All the work of
rigging, sail-making, scraping, painting, and keeping a ship in
perfect repair was done in port instead of at sea, as was the
habit in the China and California clippers, and the lore and
training of the real deep-water sailor became superfluous. The
crew of a packet made sail or took it in with the two-fisted
mates to show them how.
From these conditions was evolved the “Liverpool packet rat,"
hairy and wild and drunken, the prey of crimps and dive-keepers
ashore, brave and toughened to every hardship afloat, climbing
aloft in his red shirt, dungaree breeches, and sea-boots, with a
snow-squall whistling, the rigging sheathed with ice, and the old
ship burying her bows in the thundering combers. It was the
doctrine of his officers that he could not be ruled by anything
short of violence, and the man to tame and hammer him was the
"bucko” second mate, the test of whose fitness was that he could
whip his weight in wild cats. When he became unable to maintain
discipline with fists and belaying-pins, he was deposed for a
better man.
Your seasoned packet rat sought the ship with a hard name by
choice. His chief ambition was to kick in the ribs or pound
senseless some invincible bucko mate. There was provocation
enough on both sides. Officers had to take their ships to sea and
strain every nerve to make a safe and rapid passage with crews
which were drunk and useless when herded aboard, half of them
greenhorns, perhaps, who could neither reef nor steer. Brutality
was the one argument able to enforce instant obedience among men
who respected nothing else. As a class the packet sailors became
more and more degraded because their life was intolerable to
decent men. It followed therefore that the quarterdeck employed
increasing severity, and, as the officer’s authority in this
respect was unchecked and unlimited, it was easy to mistake the
harshest tyranny for wholesome discipline.
Reenforcing the bucko mate was the tradition that the sailor was
a dog, a different human species from the landsman, without laws
and usages to protect him. This was a tradition which, for
centuries, had been fostered in the naval service, and it
survived among merchant sailors as an unhappy anachronism even
into the twentieth century, when an American Congress was
reluctant to bestow upon a seaman the decencies of existence
enjoyed by the poorest laborer ashore.
It is in the nature of a paradox that the brilliant success of
the packet ships in dominating the North Atlantic trade should
have been a factor in the decline of the nation’s maritime
prestige and resources. Through a period of forty years the pride
and confidence in these ships, their builders, and the men who
sailed them, was intense and universal. They were a superlative
product of the American genius, which still displayed the
energies of a maritime race. On other oceans the situation was no
less gratifying. American ships were the best and cheapest in the
world. The business held the confidence of investors and
commanded an abundance of capital. It was assumed, as late as
1840, that the wooden sailing ship would continue to be the
supreme type of deep-water vessel because the United States
possessed the greatest stores of timber, the most skillful
builders and mechanics, and the ablest merchant navigators. No
industry was ever more efficiently organized and conducted.
American ships were most in demand and commanded the highest
freights. The tonnage in foreign trade increased to a maximum of
904,476 in 1845. There was no doubt in the minds of the shrewdest
merchants and owners and builders of the time that Great Britain
would soon cease to be the mistress of the seas and must content
herself with second place.
It was not considered ominous when, in 1838, the Admiralty had
requested proposals for a steam service to America. This demand
was prompted by the voyages of the Sirius and Great Western,
wooden-hulled sidewheelers which thrashed along at ten knots’
speed and crossed the Atlantic in fourteen to seventeen days.
This was a much faster rate than the average time of the Yankee
packets, but America was unperturbed and showed no interest in
steam. In 1839 the British Government awarded an Atlantic mail
contract, with an annual subsidy of $425,000 to Samuel Cunard and
his associates, and thereby created the most famous of the
Atlantic steamship companies.
Four of these liners began running in 1840--an event which
foretold the doom of the packet fleets, though the warning was
almost unheeded in New York and Boston. Four years later Enoch
Train was establishing a new packet line to Liverpool with the
largest, finest ships built up to that time, the Washington
Irving, Anglo-American, Ocean Monarch, Anglo-Saxon, and Daniel
Webster. Other prominent shipping houses were expanding their
service and were launching noble packets until 1853. Meanwhile
the Cunard steamers were increasing in size and speed, and the
service was no longer an experiment.
American capital now began to awaken from its dreams, and Edward
K. Collins, managing owner of the Dramatic line of packets,
determined to challenge the Cunarders at their own game. Aided by
the Government to the extent of $385,000 a year as subsidy, he
put afloat the four magnificent steamers, Atlantic, Pacific,
Baltic, and Arctic, which were a day faster than the Cunarders in
crossing, and reduced the voyage to nine and ten days. The
Collins line, so auspiciously begun in 1850, and promising to
give the United States the supremacy in steam which it had won
under sail, was singularly unfortunate and short-lived. The
Arctic and the Pacific were lost at sea, and Congress withdrew
its financial support after five years. Deprived of this aid, Mr.
Collins was unable to keep the enterprise afloat in competition
with the subsidized Cunard fleet. In this manner and with little
further effort by American interests to compete for the prize,
the dominion of the Atlantic passed into British hands.
The packet ships had held on too long. It had been a stirring
episode for the passengers to cheer in mid-ocean when the lofty
pyramids of canvas swept grandly by some wallowing steamer and
left her far astern, but in the fifties this gallant picture
became less frequent, and a sooty banner of smoke on the horizon
proclaimed the new era and the obliteration of all the rushing
life and beauty of the tall ship under sail. Slow to realize and
acknowledge defeat, persisting after the steamers were capturing
the cabin passenger and express freight traffic, the American
ship-owners could not visualize this profound transformation.
Their majestic clippers still surpassed all rivals in the East
India and China trade and were racing around the Horn, making new
records for speed and winning fresh nautical triumphs for the
Stars and Stripes.
This reluctance to change the industrial and commercial habits of
generations of American shipowners was one of several causes for
the decadence which was hastened by the Civil War. For once the
astute American was caught napping by his British cousin, who was
swayed by no sentimental values and showed greater adaptability
in adopting the iron steamer with the screw propeller as the
inevitable successor of the wooden ship with arching topsails.
The golden age of the American merchant marine was that of the
square-rigged ship, intricate, capricious, and feminine in her
beauty, with forty nimble seamen in the forecastle, not that of
the metal trough with an engine in the middle and mechanics
sweating in her depths. When the Atlantic packet was compelled to
abdicate, it was the beginning of the end. After all, her master
was the fickle wind, for a slashing outward passage might be
followed by weeks of beating home to the westward. Steadily
forging ahead to the beat of her paddles or the thrash of her
screw, the steamer even of that day was far more dependable than
the sailing vessel. The Lightning clipper might run a hundred
miles farther in twenty-four hours than ever a steamer had done,
but she could not maintain this meteoric burst of speed. Upon the
heaving surface of the Western Ocean there was enacted over again
the fable of the hare and the tortoise.
Most of the famous chanteys were born in the packet service and
shouted as working choruses by the tars of this Western Ocean
before the chanteyman perched upon a capstan and led the refrain
in the clipper trade. You will find their origin unmistakable in
such lines as these:
    As I was a-walking down Rotherhite Street,
      ’Way, ho, blow the man down;
    A pretty young creature I chanced for to meet,
      Give me some time to blow the man down.
    Soon we’ll be in London City,
      Blow, boys, blow,
    And see the gals all dressed so pretty,
      Blow, my bully boys, blow.
Haunting melodies, folk-song as truly as that of the plantation
negro, they vanished from the sea with a breed of men who, for
all their faults, possessed the valor of the Viking and the
fortitude of the Spartan. Outcasts ashore--which meant to them
only the dance halls of Cherry Street and the grog-shops of
Ratcliffe Road--they had virtues that were as great as their
failings. Across the intervening years, with a pathos
indefinable, come the lovely strains of
    Shenandoah, I’ll ne’er forget you,
      Away, ye rolling river,
      Till the day I die I’ll love you ever,
    Ah, ha, we’re bound away.
The American clipper ship was the result of an evolution which
can be traced back to the swift privateers which were built
during the War of 1812. In this type of vessel the shipyards of
Chesapeake Bay excelled and their handiwork was known as the
"Baltimore clipper,” the name suggested by the old English verb
which Dryden uses to describe the flight of the falcon that
"clips it down the wind.” The essential difference between the
clipper ship and other kinds of merchant craft was that speed and
not capacity became the chief consideration. This was a radical
departure for large vessels, which in all maritime history had
been designed with an eye to the number of tons they were able to
carry. More finely molded lines had hitherto been found only in
the much smaller French lugger, the Mediterranean galley, the
American schooner.
To borrow the lines of these fleet and graceful models and apply
them to the design of a deepwater ship was a bold conception. It
was first attempted by Isaac McKim, a Baltimore merchant, who
ordered his builders in 1832 to reproduce as closely as possible
the superior sailing qualities of the renowned clipper brigs and
schooners of their own port. The result was the Ann McKim, of
nearly five hundred tons, the first Yankee clipper ship, and
distinguished as such by her long, easy water-lines, low
free-board, and raking stem. She was built and finished without
regard to cost, copper-sheathed, the decks gleaming with
brasswork and mahogany fittings. But though she was a very fast
and handsome ship and the pride of her owner, the Ann McKim could
stow so little cargo that shipping men regarded her as
unprofitable and swore by their full-bodied vessels a few years
longer.
That the Ann McKim, however, influenced the ideas of the most
progressive builders is very probable, for she was later owned by
the New York firm of Howland and Aspinwall, who placed an order
for the first extremely sharp clipper ship of the era. This
vessel, the Rainbow, was designed by John W. Griffeths, a marine
architect, who was a pioneer in that he studied shipbuilding as a
science instead of working by rule-of-thumb. The Rainbow, which
created a sensation while on the stocks because of her concave or
hollowed lines forward, which defied all tradition and practice,
was launched in 1845. She was a more radical innovation than the
Ann McKim but a successful one, for on her second voyage to China
the Rainbow went out against the northeast monsoon in ninety-two
days and came home in eighty-eight, a record which few ships were
able to better. Her commander, Captain John Land, declared her to
be the fastest ship in the world and there were none to dispute
him.
Even the Rainbow however, was eclipsed when not long afterward
Howland and Aspinwall, now converted to the clipper, ordered the
Sea Witch to be built for Captain Bob Waterman. Among all the
splendid skippers of the time he was the most dashing figure.
About his briny memory cluster a hundred yarns, some of them
true, others legendary. It has been argued that the speed of the
clippers was due more to the men who commanded them than to their
hulls and rigging, and to support the theory the career of
Captain Bob Waterman is quoted. He was first known to fame in the
old Natchez, which was not a clipper at all and was even rated as
slow while carrying cotton from New Orleans to New York. But
Captain Bob took this full-pooped old packet ship around the Horn
and employed her in the China tea trade. The voyages which he
made in her were all fast, and he crowned them with the amazing
run of seventy-eight days from Canton to New York, just one day
behind the swiftest clipper passage ever sailed and which he
himself performed in the Sea Witch. Incredulous mariners simply
could not explain this feat of the Natchez and suggested that Bob
Waterman must have brought the old hooker home by some new route
of his own discovery.
Captain Bob had won a reputation for discipline as the mate of a
Black Ball liner, a rough school, and he was not a mild man.
Ashore his personality was said to have been a most attractive
one, but there is no doubt that afloat he worked the very souls
out of his sailors. The rumors that he frightfully abused them
were not current, however, until he took the Sea Witch and showed
the world the fastest ship under canvas. Low in the water, with
black hull and gilded figurehead, she seemed too small to support
her prodigious cloud of sail. For her there were to be no
leisurely voyages with Captain Bob Waterman on the quarter-deck.
Home from Canton she sped in seventy-seven days and then in
seventy-nine--records which were never surpassed.
With what consummate skill and daring this master mariner drove
his ship and how the race of hardy sailors to which he belonged
compared with those of other nations may be descried in the log
of another of them, Captain Philip Dumaresq, homeward bound from
China in 1849 in the clipper Great Britain. Three weeks out from
Java Head she had overtaken and passed seven ships heading the
same way, and then she began to rush by them in one gale after
another. Her log records her exploits in such entries as these:
"Passed a ship under double reefs, we with our royals and
studdingsails set . . . . Passed a ship laying-to under a
close-reefed maintopsail . . . . Split all three topsails and had
to heave to . . . . Seven vessels in sight and we outsail all of
them . . . . Under double-reefed topsails passed several vessels
hove-to.” Much the same record might be read in the log of the
medium clipper Florence--and it is the same story of carrying
sail superbly on a ship which had been built to stand up under
it: “Passed two barks under reefed courses and close-reefed
topsails standing the same way, we with royals and topgallant
studding-sails,” or “Passed a ship under topsails, we with our
royals set.” For eleven weeks “the topsail halliards were started
only once, to take in a single reef for a few hours.” It is not
surprising, therefore, to learn that, seventeen days out from
Shanghai, the Florence exchanged signals with the English ship
John Hagerman, which had sailed thirteen days before her.
Two notable events in the history of the nineteenth century
occurred within the same year, 1849, to open new fields of trade
to the Yankee clipper. One of these was the repeal of the British
Navigation Laws which had given English ships a monopoly of the
trade between London and the British East Indies, and the other
was the discovery of gold in California. After centuries of pomp
and power, the great East India Company had been deprived of its
last exclusive rights afloat in 1833. Its ponderous,
frigate-built merchantmen ceased to dominate the British commerce
with China and India and were sold or broken up. All British
ships were now free to engage in this trade, but the spirit and
customs of the old regime still strongly survived. Flying the
house-flags of private owners, the East Indiamen and China tea
ships were still built and manned like frigates, slow,
comfortable, snugging down for the night under reduced sail.
There was no competition to arouse them until the last barrier of
the Navigation Laws was let down and they had to meet the Yankee
clipper with the tea trade as the huge stake.
Then at last it was farewell to the gallant old Indianian and her
ornate, dignified prestige. With a sigh the London Times
confessed: “We must run a race with our gigantic and unshackled
rival. We must set our long-practised skill, our steady industry,
and our dogged determination against his youth, ingenuity, and
ardor. Let our shipbuilders and employers take warning in time.
There will always be an abundant supply of vessels good enough
and fast enough for short voyages. But we want fast vessels for
the long voyages which otherwise will fall into American hands.”
Before English merchants could prepare themselves for these new
conditions, the American clipper Oriental was loading in 1850 at
Hong Kong with tea for the London market. Because of her
reputation for speed, she received freightage of six pounds
sterling per ton while British ships rode at anchor with empty
holds or were glad to sail at three pounds ten per ton. Captain
Theodore Palmer delivered his sixteen hundred tons of tea in the
West India Docks, London, after a crack passage of ninety-one
days which had never been equaled. His clipper earned $48,000, or
two-thirds of what it had cost to build her. Her arrival in
London created a profound impression. The port had seen nothing
like her for power and speed; her skysail yards soared far above
the other shipping; the cut of her snowy canvas was faultless;
all clumsy, needless tophamper had been done away with; and she
appeared to be the last word in design and construction, as lean
and fine and spirited as a race-horse in training.
This new competition dismayed British shipping until it could
rally and fight with similar weapons The technical journal, Naval
Science, acknowledged that the tea trade of the London markets
had passed almost out of the hands of the English ship-owner, and
that British vessels, well-manned and well-found, were known to
lie for weeks in the harbor of Foo-chow, waiting for a cargo and
seeing American clippers come in, load, and sail immediately with
full cargoes at a higher freight than they could command. Even
the Government viewed the loss of trade with concern and sent
admiralty draftsmen to copy the lines of the Oriental and
Challenge while they were in drydock.
British clippers were soon afloat, somewhat different in model
from the Yankee ships, but very fast and able, and racing them in
the tea trade until the Civil War. With them it was often nip and
tuck, as in the contest between the English Lord of the Isles and
the American clipper bark Maury in 1856. The prize was a premium
of one pound per ton for the first ship to reach London with tea
of the new crop. The Lord of the Isles finished loading and
sailed four days ahead of the Maury, and after thirteen thousand
miles of ocean they passed Gravesend within ten minutes of each
other. The British skipper, having the smartest tug and getting
his ship first into dock, won the honors. In a similar race
between the American Sea Serpent and the English Crest of the
Wave, both ships arrived off the Isle of Wight on the same day.
It was a notable fact that the Lord of the Isles was the first
tea clipper built of iron at a date when the use of this stubborn
material was not yet thought of by the men who constructed the
splendid wooden ships of America.
For the peculiar requirements of the tea trade, English maritime
talent was quick to perfect a clipper type which, smaller than
the great Yankee skysail-yarder, was nevertheless most admirable
for its beauty and performance. On both sides of the Atlantic
partizans hotly championed their respective fleets. In 1852 the
American Navigation Club, organized by Boston merchants and
owners, challenged the shipbuilders of Great Britain to race from
a port in England to a port in China and return, for a stake of
$50,000 a side, ships to be not under eight hundred nor over
twelve hundred tons American register. The challenge was aimed at
the Stornaway and the Chrysolite, the two clippers that were
known to be the fastest ships under the British flag. Though this
sporting defiance caused lively discussion, nothing came of it,
and it was with a spirit even keener that Sampson and Tappan of
Boston offered to match their Nightingale for the same amount
against any clipper afloat, British or American.
In spite of the fact that Yankee enterprise had set the pace in
the tea trade, within a few years after 1850 England had so
successfully mastered the art of building these smaller clippers
that the honors were fairly divided. The American owners were
diverting their energies to the more lucrative trade in larger
ships sailing around the Horn to San Francisco, a long road
which, as a coastwise voyage, was forbidden to foreign vessels
under the navigation laws. After the Civil War the fastest tea
clippers flew the British flag and into the seventies they
survived the competition of steam, racing among themselves for
the premiums awarded to the quickest dispatch. No more of these
beautiful vessels were launched after 1869, and one by one they
vanished into other trades, overtaken by the same fate which had
befallen the Atlantic packet and conquered by the cargo steamers
which filed through the Suez Canal.
Until 1848 San Francisco had been a drowsy little Mexican
trading-post, a huddle of adobe huts and sheds where American
ships collected hides--vividly described in Two Years Before the
Mast--or a whaler called for wood and water. During the year
preceding the frenzied migration of the modern Argonauts, only
two merchant ships, one bark and one brig, sailed in through the
Golden Gate. In the twelve months following, 775 vessels cleared
from Atlantic ports for San Francisco, besides the rush from
other countries, and nearly fifty thousand passengers scrambled
ashore to dig for gold. Crews deserted their ships, leaving them
unable to go to sea again for lack of men, and in consequence a
hundred of them were used as storehouses, hotels, and hospitals,
or else rotted at their moorings. Sailors by hundreds jumped from
the forecastle without waiting to stow the sails or receive their
wages. Though offered as much as two hundred dollars a month to
sign again, they jeered at the notion. Of this great fleet at San
Francisco in 1849, it was a lucky ship that ever left the harbor
again.
It seemed as if the whole world were bound to California and
almost overnight there was created the wildest, most extravagant
demand for transportation known to history. A clipper costing
$70,000 could pay for herself in one voyage, with freights at
sixty dollars a ton. This gold stampede might last but a little
while. To take instant advantage of it was the thing. The fastest
ships, and as many of them as could be built, would skim the
cream of it. This explains the brief and illustrious era of the
California clipper, one hundred and sixty of which were launched
from 1850 to 1854. The shipyards of New York and Boston were
crowded with them, and they graced the keel blocks of the
historic old ports of New England--Medford, Mystic, Newburyport,
Portsmouth, Portland, Rockland, and Bath--wherever the timber and
the shipwrights could be assembled.
Until that time there had been few ships afloat as large as a
thousand tons. These were of a new type, rapidly increased to
fifteen hundred, two thousand tons, and over. They presented new
and difficult problems in spars and rigging able to withstand the
strain of immense areas of canvas which climbed two hundred feet
to the skysail pole and which, with lower studdingsails set,
spread one hundred and sixty feet from boom-end to boom-end.
There had to be the strength to battle with the furious tempests
of Cape Horn and at the same time the driving power to sweep
before the sweet and steadfast tradewinds. Such a queenly clipper
was the Flying Cloud, the achievement of that master builder,
Donald McKay, which sailed from New York to San Francisco in
eighty-nine days, with Captain Josiah Creesy in command. This
record was never lowered and was equaled only twice--by the
Flying Cloud herself and by the Andrew Jackson nine years later.
It was during this memorable voyage that the Flying Cloud sailed
1256 miles in four days while steering to the northward under
topgallantsails after rounding Cape Horn. This was a rate of
speed which, if sustained, would have carried her from New York
to Queenstown in eight days and seventeen hours. This speedy
passage was made in 1851, and only two years earlier the record
for the same voyage of fifteen thousand miles had been one
hundred and twenty days, by the clipper Memnon.
Donald McKay now resolved to build a ship larger and faster than
the Flying Cloud, and his genius neared perfection in the
Sovereign of the Seas, of 2421 tons register, which exceeded in
size all merchant vessels afloat. This Titan of the clipper fleet
was commanded by Donald’s brother, Captain Lauchlan McKay, with a
crew of one hundred and five men and boys. During her only voyage
to San Francisco she was partly dismasted, but Lauchlan McKay
rigged her anew at sea in fourteen days and still made port in
one hundred and three days, a record for the season of the year.
It was while running home from Honolulu in 1853 that the
Sovereign of the Seas realized the hopes of her builder. In
eleven days she sailed 3562 miles, with four days logged for a
total of 1478 knots. Making allowance for the longitudes and
difference in time, this was an average daily run of 378 sea
miles or 435 land miles. Using the same comparison, the distance
from Sandy Hook to Queenstown would have been covered in seven
days and nine hours. Figures are arid reading, perhaps, but these
are wet by the spray and swept by the salt winds of romance.
During one of these four days the Sovereign of the Seas reeled
off 424 nautical miles, during which her average speed was
seventeen and two-thirds knots and at times reached nineteen and
twenty. The only sailing ship which ever exceeded this day’s work
was the Lightning, built later by the same Donald McKay, which
ran 436 knots in the Atlantic passage already referred to. The
Sovereign of the Seas could also boast of a sensational feat upon
the Western Ocean, for between New York and Liverpool she
outsailed the Cunard liner Canada by 325 miles in five days.
It is curiously interesting to notice that the California clipper
era is almost generally ignored by the foremost English writers
of maritime history. For one thing, it was a trade in which their
own ships were not directly concerned, and partizan bias is apt
to color the views of the best of us when national prestige is
involved. American historians themselves have dispensed with many
unpleasant facts when engaged with the War of 1812. With regard
to the speed of clipper ships, however, involving a rivalry far
more thrilling and important than all the races ever sailed for
the America’s cup, the evidence is available in concrete form.
Lindsay’s “History of Merchant Shipping” is the most elaborate
English work of the kind. Heavily ballasted with facts and rather
dull reading for the most part, it kindles with enthusiasm when
eulogizing the Thermopylae and the Sir Launcelot, composite
clippers of wood and iron, afloat in 1870, which it declares to
be “the fastest sailing ships that ever traversed the ocean."
This fairly presents the issue which a true-blooded Yankee has no
right to evade. The greatest distance sailed by the Sir Launcelot
in twenty-four hours between China and London was 354 knots,
compared with the 424 miles of the Sovereign of the Seas and the
436 miles of the Lightning. Her best sustained run was one of
seven days for an average of a trifle more than 300 miles a day.
Against this is to be recorded the performance of the Sovereign
of the Seas, 3562 miles in eleven days, at the rate of 324 miles
every twenty-four hours, and her wonderful four-day run of 1478
miles, an average of 378 miles.
The Thermopylae achieved her reputation in a passage of
sixty-three days from London to Melbourne--a record which was
never beaten. Her fastest day’s sailing was 330 miles, or not
quite sixteen knots an hour. In six days she traversed 1748
miles, an average of 291 miles a day. In this Australian trade
the American clippers made little effort to compete. Those
engaged in it were mostly built for English owners and sailed by
British skippers, who could not reasonably be expected to get the
most out of these loftily sparred Yankee ships, which were much
larger than their own vessels of the same type. The Lightning
showed what she could do from Melbourne to Liverpool by making
the passage in sixty-three’ days, with 3722 miles in ten
consecutive days and one day’s sprint of 412 miles.
In the China tea trade the Thermopylae drove home from Foo-chow
in ninety-one days, which was equaled by the Sir Launcelot. The
American Witch of the Wave had a ninety-day voyage to her credit,
and the Comet ran from Liverpool to Shanghai in eighty-four days.
Luck was a larger factor on this route than in the California or
Australian trade because of the fitful uncertainty of the
monsoons, and as a test of speed it was rather unsatisfactory. In
a very fair-minded and expert summary, Captain Arthur H. Clark,*
in his youth an officer on Yankee clippers, has discussed this
question of rival speed and power under sail--a question which
still absorbs those who love the sea. His conclusion is that in
ordinary weather at sea, when great power to carry sail was not
required, the British tea clippers were extremely fast vessels,
chiefly on account of their narrow beam. Under these conditions
they were perhaps as fast as the American clippers of the same
class, such as the Sea Witch, White Squall, Northern Light, and
Sword-Fish. But if speed is to be reckoned by the maximum
performance of a ship under the most favorable conditions, then
the British tea clippers were certainly no match for the larger
American ships such as the Flying Cloud, Sovereign of the Seas,
Hurricane, Trade Wind, Typhoon, Flying Fish, Challenge, and Red
Jacket. The greater breadth of the American ships in proportion
to their length meant power to carry canvas and increased
buoyancy which enabled them, with their sharper ends, to be
driven in strong gales and heavy seas at much greater speed than
the British clippers. The latter were seldom of more than one
thousand tons’ register and combined in a superlative degree the
good qualities of merchant ships.
* “The Clipper Ship Era.” N.Y., 1910.
It was the California trade, brief and crowded and fevered, which
saw the roaring days of the Yankee clipper and which was familiar
with racing surpassing in thrill and intensity that of the packet
ships of the Western Ocean. In 1851, for instance, the Raven, Sea
Witch, and Typhoon sailed for San Francisco within the same week.
They crossed the Equator a day apart and stood away to the
southward for three thousand miles of the southeast trades and
the piping westerly winds which prevailed farther south. At fifty
degrees south latitude the Raven and the Sea Witch were abeam of
each other with the Typhoon only two days astern.
Now they stripped for the tussle to windward around Cape Horn,
sending down studdingsail booms and skysail yards, making all
secure with extra lashings, plunging into the incessant head seas
of the desolate ocean, fighting it out tack for tack, reefing
topsails and shaking them out again, the vigilant commanders
going below only to change their clothes, the exhausted seamen
stubbornly, heroically handling with frozen, bleeding fingers the
icy sheets and canvas. A fortnight of this inferno and the Sea
Witch and the Raven gained the Pacific, still within sight of
each other, and the Typhoon only one day behind. Then they swept
northward, blown by the booming tradewinds, spreading
studdingsails, skysails, and above them, like mere handkerchiefs,
the water-sails and ring-tails. Again the three clippers crossed
the Equator. Close-hauled on the starboard tack, their bowsprits
were pointed for the last stage of the journey to the Golden
Gate. The Typhoon now overhauled her rivals and was the first to
signal her arrival, but the victory was earned by the Raven,
which had set her departure from Boston Light while the others
had sailed from New York. The Typhoon and the Raven were only a
day apart, with the Sea Witch five days behind the leader.
Clipper ship crews included men of many nations. In the average
forecastle there would be two or three Americans, a majority of
English and Norwegians, and perhaps a few Portuguese and
Italians. The hardiest seamen, and the most unmanageable, were
the Liverpool packet rats who were lured from their accustomed
haunts to join the clippers by the magical call of the
gold-diggings. There were not enough deep-water sailors to man
half the ships that were built in these few years, and the crimps
and boarding-house runners decoyed or flung aboard on sailing day
as many men as were demanded, and any drunken, broken landlubber
was good enough to be shipped as an able seaman. They were things
of rags and tatters--their only luggage a bottle of whiskey.
The mates were thankful if they could muster enough real sailors
to work the ship to sea and then began the stern process of
whipping the wastrels and incompetents into shape for the perils
and emergencies of the long voyage. That these great clippers
were brought safely to port is a shining tribute to the masterful
skill of their officers. While many of them were humane and just,
with all their severity, the stories of savage abuse which are
told of some are shocking in the extreme. The defense was that it
was either mutiny or club the men under. Better treatment might
have persuaded better men to sail. Certain it is that life in the
forecastle of a clipper was even more intolerable to the
self-respecting American youth than it had previously been aboard
the Atlantic packet.
When Captain Bob Waterman arrived at San Francisco in the
Challenge clipper in 1851, a mob tried very earnestly to find and
hang him and his officers because of the harrowing stories told
by his sailors. That he had shot several of them from the yards
with his pistol to make the others move faster was one count in
the indictment. For his part, Captain Waterman asserted that a
more desperate crew of ruffians had never sailed out of New York
and that only two of them were Americans. They were mutinous from
the start, half of them blacklegs of the vilest type who swore to
get the upper hand of him. His mates, boatswain, and carpenter
had broken open their chests and boxes and had removed a
collection of slung-shots, knuckle-dusters, bowie-knives, and
pistols. Off Rio Janeiro they had tried to kill the chief mate,
and Captain Waterman had been compelled to jump in and stretch
two of them dead with an iron belaying-pin. Off Cape Horn three
sailors fell from aloft and were lost. This accounted for the
casualties.
The truth of such episodes as these was difficult to fathom.
Captain Waterman demanded a legal investigation, but nothing came
of his request and he was commended by his owners for his skill
and courage in bringing the ship to port without losing a spar or
a sail. It was a skipper of this old school who blandly
maintained the doctrine that if you wanted the men to love you,
you must starve them and knock them down. The fact is proven by
scores of cases that the discipline of the American clipper was
both famously efficient and notoriously cruel. It was not until
long after American sailors had ceased to exist that adequate
legislation was enacted to provide that they should be treated as
human beings afloat and ashore. Other days and other customs! It
is perhaps unkind to judge these vanished master-mariners too
harshly, for we cannot comprehend the crises which continually
beset them in their command.
No more extreme clipper ships were built after 1854. The
California frenzy had subsided and speed in carrying merchandise
was no longer so essential; besides, the passenger traffic was
seeking the Isthmian route. What were called medium clippers
enjoyed a profitable trade for many years later, and one of them,
the Andrew Jackson, was never outsailed for the record from New
York to San Francisco. This splendid type of ship was to be found
on every sea, for the United States was still a commanding factor
in the maritime activities of South America, India, China,
Europe, and Australia. In 1851 its merchant tonnage rivaled that
of England and was everywhere competing with it.
The effects of the financial panic of 1857 and the aftermath of
business depression were particularly disastrous to American
ships. Freights were so low as to yield no profit, and the finest
clippers went begging for charters. The yards ceased to launch
new tonnage. British builders had made such rapid progress in
design and construction that the days of Yankee preference in the
China trade had passed. The Stars and Stripes floated over ships
waiting idle in Manila Bay, at Shanghai, Hong-Kong, and Calcutta.
The tide of commerce had slackened abroad as well as at home and
the surplus of deep-water tonnage was world-wide.
In earlier generations afloat, the American spirit had displayed
amazing recuperative powers. The havoc of the Revolution had been
unable to check it, and its vigor and aggressive enterprise had
never been more notable than after the blows dealt by the
Embargo, the French Spoliations, and the War of 1812. The
conditions of trade and the temper of the people were now so
changed that this mighty industry, aforetime so robust and
resilient, was unable to recover from such shocks as the panic of
1857 and the Civil War. Yet it had previously survived and
triumphed over calamities far more severe. The destruction
wrought by Confederate cruisers was trifling compared with the
work of the British and French privateers when the nation was
very small and weak.
The American spirit had ceased to concern itself with the sea as
the vital and dominant element. The footsteps of the young men no
longer turned toward the wharf and the waterside and the tiers of
tall ships outward bound. They were aspiring to conquer an inland
empire of prairie and mountain and desert, impelled by the same
pioneering and adventurous ardor which had burned in their
seafaring sires. Steam had vanquished sail--an epochal event in a
thousand years of maritime history--but the nation did not care
enough to accept this situation as a new challenge or to continue
the ancient struggle for supremacy upon the sea. England did
care, because it was life or death to the little, sea-girt
island, but as soon as the United States ceased to be a strip of
Atlantic seaboard and the panorama, of a continent was unrolled
to settlement, it was foreordained that the maritime habit of
thought and action should lose its virility in America. All great
seafaring races, English, Norwegian, Portuguese, and Dutch, have
taken to salt water because there was lack of space, food, or
work ashore, and their strong young men craved opportunities.
Like the Pilgrim Fathers and their fishing shallops they had
nowhere else to go.
When the Flying Cloud and the clippers of her kind--taut, serene,
immaculate--were sailing through the lonely spaces of the South
Atlantic and the Pacific, they sighted now and then the stumpy,
slatternly rig and greasy hull of a New Bedford whaler, perhaps
rolling to the weight of a huge carcass alongside. With a poor
opinion of the seamanship of these wandering barks, the clipper
crews rolled out, among their favorite chanteys:
    Oh, poor Reuben Ranzo,
    Ranzo, boys, O Ranzo,
    Oh, Ranzo was no sailor,
    So they shipped him aboard a whaler,
    Ranzo, boys, O Ranzo.
This was crass, intolerant prejudice. The whaling ship was
careless of appearances, it is true, and had the air of an ocean
vagabond; but there were other duties more important than
holystoning decks, scraping spars, and trimming the yards to a
hair. On a voyage of two or three years, moreover, there was
always plenty of time tomorrow. Brave and resourceful seamen were
these New England adventurers and deep-sea hunters who made
nautical history after their own fashion. They flourished coeval
with the merchant marine in its prime, and they passed from the
sea at about the same time and for similar reasons. Modernity
dispensed with their services, and young men found elsewhere more
profitable and easier employment.
The great days of Nantucket as a whaling port were passed before
the Revolution wiped out her ships and killed or scattered her
sailors. It was later discovered that larger ships were more
economical, and Nantucket harbor bar was too shoal to admit their
passage. For this reason New Bedford became the scene of the
foremost activity, and Nantucket thereafter played a minor part,
although her barks went cruising on to the end of the chapter and
her old whaling families were true to strain. As explorers the
whalemen rambled into every nook and corner of the Pacific before
merchant vessels had found their way thither. They discovered
uncharted islands and cheerfully fought savages or suffered
direful shipwreck. The chase led them into Arctic regions where
their stout barks were nipped like eggshells among the grinding
floes, or else far to the southward where they broiled in tropic
calms. The New Bedford lad was as keen to go a-whaling as was his
counterpart in Boston or New York to be the dandy mate of a
California clipper, and true was the song:
      I asked a maiden by my side,
    Who sighed and looked to me forlorn,
      “Where is your heart?” She quick replied,
    “Round Cape Horn.”
Yankee whaling reached its high tide in 1857 when the New Bedford
fleet alone numbered 329 sail and those owned in other ports of
Buzzard’s Bay swelled the total to 426 vessels, besides thirty
more hailing from New London and Sag Harbor. In this year the
value of the catch was more than ten million dollars. The old
custom of sailing on shares or “lays” instead of wages was never
changed. It was win or lose for all hands--now a handsome fortune
or again an empty hold and pockets likewise. There was Captain
W.T. Walker of New Bedford who, in 1847, bought for a song a ship
so old that she was about to be broken up for junk and no
insurance broker would look at her. In this rotten relic he
shipped a crew and went sailing in the Pacific. Miraculously
keeping afloat, this Envoy of his was filled to the hatches with
oil and bones, twice running, before she returned to her home
port; and she earned $138,450 on a total investment of eight
thousand dollars.
The ship Sarah of Nantucket, after a three years’ cruise, brought
back 3497 barrels of sperm oil which sold for $89,000, and the
William Hamilton of New Bedford set another high mark by stowing
4181 barrels of a value of $109,269. The Pioneer of New London,
Captain Ebenezer Morgan, was away only a year and stocked a cargo
of oil and whalebone which sold for $150,060. Most of the profits
of prosperous voyages were taken as the owners’ share, and the
incomes of the captain and crew were so niggardly as to make one
wonder why they persisted in a calling so perilous, arduous, and
poorly paid. During the best years of whaling, when the ships
were averaging $16,000 for a voyage, the master received an
eighteenth, or about nine hundred dollars a year. The highly
skilled hands, such as the boat-steerers and harpooners, had a
lay of only one seventy-fifth, or perhaps a little more than two
hundred dollars cash as the reward of a voyage which netted the
owner at least fifty per cent on his investment. Occasionally
they fared better than this and sometimes worse. The answer to
the riddle is that they liked the life and had always the
gambling spirit which hopes for a lucky turn of the cards.
The countless episodes of fragile boats smashed to kindling by
fighting whales, of the attack renewed with harpoon and lance, of
ships actually rammed and sunk, would fill a volume by themselves
and have been stirringly narrated in many a one. Zanzibar and
Kamchatka, Tasmania and the Seychelles knew the lean, sun-dried
Yankee whaleman and his motto of a “dead whale or a stove boat."
The Civil War did not drive him from the seas. The curious fact
is that his products commanded higher prices in 1907 than fifty
years before, but the number of his ships rapidly decreased.
Whales were becoming scarce, and New England capital preferred
other forms of investment. The leisurely old sailing craft was
succeeded by the steam whaler, and the explosive bomb slew,
instead of the harpoon and lance hurled by the sinewy right arm
of a New Bedford man or Cape Verde islander.
Roving whaler and armed East Indiaman, plunging packet ship and
stately clipper, they served their appointed days and passed on
their several courses to become mere memories, as shadowy and
unsubstantial as the gleam of their own topsails when seen at
twilight. The souls of their sailors have fled to Fiddler’s
Green, where all dead mariners go. They were of the old merchant
marine which contributed something fine and imperishable to the
story of the United States. Down the wind, vibrant and
deep-throated, comes their own refrain for a requiem:
    We’re outward bound this very day,
    Good-bye, fare you well,
    Good-bye, fare you well.
    We’re outward bound this very day,
      Hurrah, my boys, we’re outward bound.
One thinks of the old merchant marine in terms of the clipper
ship and distant ports. The coasting trade has been overlooked in
song and story; yet, since the year 1859, its fleets have always
been larger and more important than the American deep-water
commerce nor have decay and misfortune overtaken them. It is a
traffic which flourished from the beginning, ingeniously adapting
itself to new conditions, unchecked by war, and surviving with
splendid vigor, under steam and sail, in this modern era.
The seafaring pioneers won their way from port to port of the
tempestuous Atlantic coast in tiny ketches, sloops, and shallops
when the voyage of five hundred miles from New England to
Virginia was a prolonged and hazardous adventure. Fog and shoals
and lee shores beset these coastwise sailors, and shipwrecks were
pitifully frequent. In no Hall of Fame will you find the name of
Captain Andrew Robinson of Gloucester, but he was nevertheless an
illustrious benefactor and deserves a place among the most useful
Americans. His invention was the Yankee schooner of fore-and-aft
rig, and he gave to this type of vessel its name.* Seaworthy,
fast, and easily handled, adapted for use in the early eighteenth
century when inland transportation was almost impossible, the
schooner carried on trade between the colonies and was an
important factor in the growth of the fisheries.
* It is said that as the odd two-master slid gracefully into the
water, a spectator exclaimed: “See how she scoons!” “Aye,"
answered Captain Robinson, “a SCHOONER let her be!” This
launching took place in 1718 or 1714.
Before the Revolution the first New England schooners were
beating up to the Grand Bank of Newfoundland after cod and
halibut. They were of no more than fifty tons’ burden, too small
for their task but manned by fishermen of surpassing hardihood.
Marblehead was then the foremost fishing port with two hundred
brigs and schooners on the offshore banks. But to Gloucester
belongs the glory of sending the first schooner to the Grand
Bank.* From these two rock-bound harbors went thousands of
trained seamen to man the privateers and the ships of the
Continental navy, slinging their hammocks on the gun-decks beside
the whalemen of Nantucket. These fishermen and coastwise sailors
fought on the land as well and followed the drums of Washington’s
armies until the final scene at Yorktown. Gloucester and
Marblehead were filled with widows and orphans, and half their
men-folk were dead or missing.
* Marvin’s “American Merchant Marine,” p. 287.
The fishing-trade soon prospered again, and the men of the old
ports tenaciously clung to the sea even when the great migration
flowed westward to people the wilderness and found a new American
empire. They were fishermen from father to son, bound together in
an intimate community of interests, a race of pure native or
English stock, deserving this tribute which was paid to them in
Congress: “Every person on board our fishing vessels has an
interest in common with his associates; their reward depends upon
their industry and enterprise. Much caution is observed in the
selection of the crews of our fishing vessels; it often happens
that every individual is connected by blood and the strongest
ties of friendship; our fishermen are remarkable for their
sobriety and good conduct, and they rank with the most skillful
navigators.”
Fishing and the coastwise merchant trade were closely linked.
Schooners loaded dried cod as well as lumber for southern ports
and carried back naval stores and other southern products.
Well-to-do fishermen owned trading vessels and sent out
their ventures, the sailors shifting from one forecastle to the
other. With a taste for an easier life than the stormy, freezing
Banks, the young Gloucesterman would sign on for a voyage to
Pernambuco or Havana and so be fired with ambition to become a
mate or master and take to deep water after a while. In this way
was maintained a school of seamanship which furnished the most
intelligent and efficient officers of the merchant marine. For
generations they were mostly recruited from the old fishing and
shipping ports of New England until the term “Yankee shipmaster"
had a meaning peculiarly its own.
Seafaring has undergone so many revolutionary changes and old
days and ways are so nearly obliterated that it is singular to
find the sailing vessel still employed in great numbers, even
though the gasolene motor is being installed to kick her along in
spells of calm weather. The Gloucester fishing schooner, perfect
of her type, stanch, fleet, and powerful, still drives homeward
from the Banks under a tall press of canvas, and her crew still
divide the earnings, share and share, as did their forefathers a
hundred and fifty years ago. But the old New England strain of
blood no longer predominates, and Portuguese, Scandinavians, and
Nova Scotia “Bluenoses” bunk with the lads of Gloucester stock.
Yet they are alike for courage, hardihood, and mastery of the
sea, and the traditions of the calling are undimmed.
There was a time before the Civil War when Congress jealously
protected the fisheries by means of a bounty system and
legislation aimed against our Canadian neighbors. The fishing
fleets were regarded as a source of national wealth and the
nursery of prime seamen for the navy and merchant marine. In 1858
the bounty system was abandoned, however, and the fishermen were
left to shift for themselves, earning small profits at peril of
their lives and preferring to follow the sea because they knew no
other profession. In spite of this loss of assistance from the
Government, the tonnage engaged in deep-sea fisheries was never
so great as in the second year of the Civil War. Four years later
the industry had shrunk one-half; and it has never recovered its
early importance*
* In 1882, the tonnage amounted to 193,459; in 1866, to 89,336.
The coastwise merchant trade, on the other hand, has been
jealously guarded against competition and otherwise fostered ever
since 1789, when the first discriminatory tonnage tax was
enforced. The Embargo Act of 1808 prohibited domestic commerce to
foreign flags, and this edict was renewed in the American
Navigation Act of 1817. It remained a firmly established doctrine
of maritime policy until the Great War compelled its suspension
as an emergency measure. The theories of protection and free
trade have been bitterly debated for generations, but in this
instance the practice was eminently successful and the results
were vastly impressive. Deepwater shipping dwindled and died, but
the increase in coastwise sailing was consistent. It rose to five
million tons early in this century and makes the United States
still one of the foremost maritime powers in respect to saltwater
activity.
To speak of this deep-water shipping as trade coastwise is
misleading, in a way. The words convey an impression of dodging
from port to port for short distances, whereas many of the
voyages are longer than those of the foreign routes in European
waters. It is farther by sea from Boston to Philadelphia than
from Plymouth, England, to Bordeaux. A schooner making the run
from Portland to Savannah lays more knots over her stern than a
tramp bound out from England to Lisbon. It is a shorter voyage
from Cardiff to Algiers than an American skipper pricks off on
his chart when he takes his steamer from New York to New Orleans
or Galveston. This coastwise trade may lack the romance of the
old school of the square-rigged ship in the Roaring Forties, but
it has always been the more perilous and exacting. Its seamen
suffer hardships unknown elsewhere, for they have to endure
winters of intense cold and heavy gales and they are always in
risk of stranding or being driven ashore.
The story of these hardy men is interwoven, for the most part,
with the development of the schooner in size and power. This
graceful craft, so peculiar to its own coast and people, was
built for utility and possessed a simple beauty of its own when
under full sail. The schooners were at first very small because
it was believed that large fore-and-aft sails could not be
handled with safety. They were difficult to reef or lower in a
blow until it was discovered that three masts instead of two made
the task much easier. For many years the three-masted schooner
was the most popular kind of American merchant vessel. They
clustered in every Atlantic port and were built in the yards of
New England, New York, New Jersey, and Virginia,--built by the
mile, as the saying was, and sawed off in lengths to suit the
owners’ pleasure. They carried the coal, ice, lumber of the whole
seaboard and were so economical of man-power that they earned
dividends where steamers or square-rigged ships would not have
paid for themselves.
As soon as a small steam-engine was employed to hoist the sails,
it became possible to launch much larger schooners and to operate
them at a marvelously low cost. Rapidly the four-master gained
favor, and then came the five- and six-masted vessels, gigantic
ships of their kind. Instead of the hundred-ton schooner of a
century ago, Hampton Roads and Boston Harbor saw these great
cargo carriers which could stow under hatches four and five
thousand tons of coal, and whose masts soared a hundred and fifty
feet above the deck. Square-rigged ships of the same capacity
would have required crews of a hundred men, but these schooners
were comfortably handled by a company of fifteen all told, only
ten of whom were in the forecastle. There was no need of sweating
and hauling at braces and halliards. The steam-winch undertook all
this toil. The tremendous sails, stretching a hundred feet from
boom to gaff could not have been managed otherwise. Even for
trimming sheets or setting topsails, it was necessary merely to
take a turn or two around the drum of the winch engine and turn
the steam valve. The big schooner was the last word in cheap,
efficient transportation by water. In her own sphere of activity
she was as notable an achievement as the Western Ocean packet or
the Cape Horn clipper.
The masters who sailed these extraordinary vessels also changed
and had to learn a new kind of seamanship. They must be very
competent men, for the tests of their skill and readiness were
really greater than those demanded of the deepwater skipper. They
drove these great schooners alongshore winter and summer; across
Nantucket Shoals and around Cape Cod, and their salvation
depended on shortening sail ahead of the gale. Let the wind once
blow and the sea get up, and it was almost impossible to strip
the canvas off an unwieldy six-master. The captain’s chief fear
was of being blown offshore, of having his vessel run away with
him! Unlike the deep-water man, he preferred running in toward
the beach and letting go his anchors. There he would ride out the
storm and hoist sail when the weather moderated.
These were American shipmasters of the old breed, raised in
schooners as a rule, and adapting themselves to modern
conditions. They sailed for nominal wages and primage, or five
per cent of the gross freight paid the vessel. Before the Great
War in Europe, freights were low and the schooner skippers earned
scanty incomes. Then came a world shortage of tonnage and
immediately coastwise freights soared skyward. The big schooners
of the Palmer fleet began to reap fabulous dividends and their
masters shared in the unexpected opulence. Besides their primage
they owned shares in their vessels, a thirty-second or so, and
presently their settlement at the end of a voyage coastwise
amounted to an income of a thousand dollars a month. They earned
this money, and the managing owners cheerfully paid them, for
there had been lean years and uncomplaining service and the
sailor had proved himself worthy of his hire. So tempting was the
foreign war trade, that a fleet of them was sent across the
Atlantic until the American Government barred them from the war
zone as too easy a prey for submarine attack. They therefore
returned to the old coastwise route or loaded for South American
ports--singularly interesting ships because they were the last
bold venture of the old American maritime spirit, a challenge to
the Age of Steam.
No more of these huge, towering schooners have been built in the
last dozen years. Steam colliers and barges have won the fight
because time is now more valuable than cheapness of
transportation. The schooner might bowl down to Norfolk from
Boston or Portland in four days and be threshing about for two
weeks in head winds on the return voyage.
The small schooner appeared to be doomed somewhat earlier. She
had ceased to be profitable in competition with the larger, more
modern fore-and-after, but these battered, veteran craft died
hard. They harked back to a simpler age, to the era of the
stage-coach and the spinning-wheel, to the little shipyards that
were to be found on every bay and inlet of New England. They were
still owned and sailed by men who ashore were friends and
neighbors. Even now you may find during your summer wanderings
some stumpy, weatherworn two-master running on for shelter
overnight, which has plied up and down the coast for fifty or
sixty years, now leaking like a basket and too frail for winter
voyages. It was in a craft very much like this that your rude
ancestors went privateering against the British. Indeed, the
little schooner Polly, which fought briskly in the War of 1812,
is still afloat and loading cargoes in New England ports.
These little coasters, surviving long after the stately merchant
marine had vanished from blue water, have enjoyed a slant of
favoring fortune in recent years. They, too, have been in demand,
and once again there is money to spare for paint and cordage and
calking. They have been granted a new lease of life and may be
found moored at the wharfs, beached on the marine railways, or
anchored in the stream, eagerly awaiting their turn to refit. It
is a matter of vital concern that the freight on spruce boards
from Bangor to New York has increased to five dollars a thousand
feet. Many of these craft belong to grandfatherly skippers who
dared not venture past Cape Cod in December, lest the venerable
Matilda Emerson or the valetudinarian Joshua R. Coggswell should
open up and founder in a blow. During the winter storms these
skippers used to hug the kitchen stove in bleak farmhouses until
spring came and they could put to sea again. The rigor of
circumstances, however, forced others to seek for trade the whole
year through. In a recent winter fifty-seven schooners were lost
on the New England coast, most of which were unfit for anything
but summer breezes. As by a miracle, others have been able to
renew their youth, to replace spongy planking and rotten stems,
and to deck themselves out in white canvas and fresh paint!
The captains of these craft foregather in the ship-chandler’s
shops, where the floor is strewn with sawdust, the armchairs are
capacious, and the environment harmonizes with the tales that are
told. It is an informal club of coastwise skippers and the old
energy begins to show itself once more. They move with a brisker
gait than when times were so hard and they went begging for
charters at any terms. A sinewy patriarch stumps to a window,
flourishes his arm at an ancient two-master, and booms out:
“That vessel of mine is as sound as a nut, I tell ye. She ain’t
as big as some, but I’d like nothin’ better than to fill her full
of suthin’ for the west coast of Africy, same as the Horace M.
Bickford that cleared t’other day, stocked for SIXTY THOUSAND
DOLLARS.”
“Huh, you’d get lost out o’ sight of land, John,” is the cruel
retort, “and that old shoe-box of yours ’ud be scared to death
without a harbor to run into every time the sun clouded over.
Expect to navigate to Africy with an alarm-clock and a
soundin’-lead, I presume.”
“Mebbe I’d better let well enough alone,” replies the old man.
"Africy don’t seem as neighborly as Phippsburg and Machiasport.
I’ll chance it as far as Philadelphy next voyage and I guess the
old woman can buy a new dress.”
The activity and the reawakening of the old shipyards, their
slips all filled with the frames of wooden vessels for the
foreign trade, is like a revival of the old merchant marine, a
reincarnation of ghostly memories. In mellowed dignity the square
white houses beneath the New England elms recall to mind the
mariners who dwelt therein. It seems as if their shipyards also
belonged to the past; but the summer visitor finds a fresh
attraction in watching the new schooners rise from the stocks,
and the gay pageant of launching them, every mast ablaze with
bunting, draws crowds to the water-front. And as a business
venture, with somewhat of the tang of old-fashioned romance, the
casual stranger is now and then tempted to purchase a
sixty-fourth “piece” of a splendid Yankee four-master and keep in
touch with its roving fortunes. The shipping reports of the daily
newspaper prove more fascinating than the ticker tape, and the
tidings of a successful voyage thrill one with a sense of
personal gratification. For the sea has not lost its magic and
its mystery, and those who go down to it in ships must still
battle against elemental odds--still carry on the noble and
enduring traditions of the Old Merchant Marine.
As a rule, American historians like McMaster, Adams, and Rhodes
give too little space to the maritime achievements of the nation.
The gap has been partially filled by the following special works:
Winthrop L. Marvin, “The American Merchant Marine: Its History
and Romance from 1620 to 1902” (1902). This is the most nearly
complete volume of its kind by an author who knows the subject
and handles it with accuracy.
John R. Spears, “The Story of the American Merchant Marine"
(1910), “The American Slave Trade” (1901), “The Story of the New
England Whalers” (1908). Mr. Spears has sought original sources
for much of his material and his books are worth reading,
particularly his history of the slave-trade.
Ralph D. Paine, “The Ships and Sailors of Old Salem: The Record
of a Brilliant Era of American Achievement” (1912). A history of
the most famous seaport of the Atlantic coast, drawn from
log-books and other manuscript collections. “The Book of Buried
Treasure: Being a True History of the Gold, Jewels, and Plate of
Pirates, Galleons, etc.” (1911). Several chapters have to do with
certain picturesque pirates and seamen of the colonies.
Edgar S. Maclay, “A History of American Privateers” (1899). The
only book of its kind, and indispensable to those who wish to
learn the story of Yankee ships and sailors.
J. R. Hutchinson, “The Press Gang Afloat and Ashore” (1914). This
recent volume, written from an English point of view, illuminates
the system of conscription which caused the War of 1812.
Nothing can take the place, however, of the narratives of those
master mariners who made the old merchant marine famous:
Richard Henry Dana, Jr., “Two Years Before the Mast” (1840). The
latest edition, handsomely illustrated, (1915). The classic
narrative of American forecastle life in the sailing-ship era.
Captain Richard Cleveland, “Narrative of Voyages and Commercial
Enterprises” (1842). This is one of the fascinating
autobiographies of the old school of shipmasters who had the gift
of writing.
Captain Amasa Delano, “Narrative of Voyages and Travels” (1817).
Another of the rare human documents of blue water. It describes
the most adventurous period of activity, a century ago.
Captain Arthur H. Clark, “The Clipper Ship Era” (1910). A
thrilling, spray-swept, true story. Far and away the best account
of the clipper, by a man who was an officer of one in his youth.
Robert Bennet Forbes, “Notes on Ships of the Past” (1888). Random
facts and memories of a famous Boston ship-owner. It is valuable
for its records of noteworthy passages.
Captain John D. Whidden, “Ocean Life in the Old Sailing Ship
Days” (1908). The entertaining reminiscences of a veteran
shipmaster.
Captain A. W. Nelson, “Yankee Swanson: Chapters from a Life at
Sea” (1913). Another of the true romances, recommended for a
lively sense of humor and a faithful portrayal of life aboard a
windjammer.
There are many other personal narratives, some of them privately
printed and very old, which may be found in the libraries.
Typical of them is “A Journal of the Travels and Sufferings of
Daniel Saunders” (1794), in which a young sailor relates his
adventures after shipwreck on the coast of Arabia.
Among general works the following are valuable:
J. Grey Jewell, “Among Our Sailors” (1874). A plea for more
humane treatment of American seamen, with many instances on
shocking brutalities as reported to the author, who was a United
States Consul.
E. Keble Chatterton, “Sailing Ships: The Story of their
Development” (1909). An elaborate history of the development of
the sailing vessel from the earliest times to the modern steel
clipper.
W. S. Lindsay, “History of Merchant Shipping and Ancient
Commerce,” 4 vols. (1874-76). An English work, notably fair to
the American marine, and considered authoritative.
Douglas Owen, “Ocean Trade and Shipping” (1914). An English
economist explains the machinery of maritime trade and commerce.
William Wood, “All Afloat.” In “The Chronicles of Canada Series."
Glasgow, Brook and Co., Toronto, 1914.
J. B. McMaster, “The Life and Times of Stephen Girard, Mariner
and Merchant,” 2 vols. (1918).
The relation of governmental policy to the merchant marine is
discussed by various writers:
David A. Wells, “Our Merchant Marine: How It Rose, Increased,
Became Great, Declined, and Decayed” (1882). A political treatise
in defense of a protective policy.
William A. Bates, “American Marine: The Shipping Question in
History and Politics” (1892); “American Navigation: The Political
History of Its Rise and Ruin” (1902). These works are statistical
and highly technical, partly compiled from governmental reports,
and are also frankly controversial.
Henry Hall, “American Navigation, With Some Account of the Causes
of Its Former Prosperity and Present Decline” (1878).
Charles S. Hill, “History of American Shipping: Its Prestige,
Decline, and Prospect” (1883).
J. D. J. Kelley, “The Question of Ships: The Navy and the
Merchant Marine” (1884).
Arthur J. Maginnis, “The Atlantic Ferry: Its Ships, Men, and
Working” (1900).
A vast amount of information is to be found in the Congressional
Report of the Merchant Marine Commission, published in three
volumes (1905).

The e-text of “The Old Merchant Marine, A Chronicle of American Ships and Sailors” (Ralph D. Paine) is free for you to copy.
Page created by Philipp Lenssen.

Last updated on November 2003.

Old Merchant MarineBy Ralph D. PaineAt Amazon
