




Among the rooms which used most commonly to take shape in my mind during
my long nights of sleeplessness, there was none that differed more utterly
from the rooms at Combray, thickly powdered with the motes of an
atmosphere granular, pollenous, edible and instinct with piety, than my
room in the Grand Hôtel de la Plage, at Balbec, the walls of which, washed
with ripolin, contained, like the polished sides of a basin in which the
water glows with a blue, lurking fire, a finer air, pure, azure-tinted,
saline.  The Bavarian upholsterer who had been entrusted with the
furnishing of this hotel had varied his scheme of decoration in different
rooms, and in that which I found myself occupying had set against the
walls, on three sides of it, a series of low book-cases with glass fronts,
in which, according to where they stood, by a law of nature which he had,
perhaps, forgotten to take into account, was reflected this or that
section of the ever-changing view of the sea, so that the walls were lined
with a frieze of seascapes, interrupted only by the polished mahogany of
the actual shelves. And so effective was this that the whole room had the
appearance of one of those model bedrooms which you see nowadays in
Housing Exhibitions, decorated with works of art which are calculated by
their designer to refresh the eyes of whoever may ultimately have to sleep
in the rooms, the subjects being kept in some degree of harmony with the
locality and surroundings of the houses for which the rooms are planned.
And yet nothing could have differed more utterly, either, from the real
Balbec than that other Balbec of which I had often dreamed, on stormy
days, when the wind was so strong that Françoise, as she took me to the
Champs-Elysées, would warn me not to walk too near the side of the street,
or I might have my head knocked off by a falling slate, and would recount
to me, with many lamentations, the terrible disasters and shipwrecks that
were reported in the newspaper. I longed for nothing more than to behold a
storm at sea, less as a mighty spectacle than as a momentary revelation of
the true life of nature; or rather there were for me no mighty spectacles
save those which I knew to be not artificially composed for my
entertainment, but necessary and unalterable,–the beauty of landscapes or
of great works of art. I was not curious, I did not thirst to know
anything save what I believed to be more genuine than myself, what had for
me the supreme merit of shewing me a fragment of the mind of a great
genius, or of the force or the grace of nature as she appeared when left
entirely to herself, without human interference. Just as the lovely sound
of her voice, reproduced, all by itself, upon the phonograph, could never
console a man for the loss of his mother, so a mechanical imitation of a
storm would have left me as cold as did the illuminated fountains at the
Exhibition. I required also, if the storm was to be absolutely genuine,
that the shore from which I watched it should be a natural shore, not an
embankment recently constructed by a municipality. Besides, nature, by all
the feelings that she aroused in me, seemed to me the most opposite thing
in the world to the mechanical inventions of mankind The less she bore
their imprint, the more room she offered for the expansion of my heart.
And, as it happened, I had preserved the name of Balbec, which Legrandin
had cited to us, as that of a sea-side place in the very midst of “that
funereal coast, famed for the number of its wrecks, swathed, for six
months in the year, in a shroud of fog and flying foam from the waves.
“You feel, there, below your feet still,” he had told me, “far more even
than at Finistère (and even though hotels are now being superimposed upon
it, without power, however, to modify that oldest bone in the earth’s
skeleton) you feel there that you are actually at the land’s end of
France, of Europe, of the Old World. And it is the ultimate encampment of
the fishermen, precisely like the fishermen who have lived since the
world’s beginning, facing the everlasting kingdom of the sea-fogs and
shadows of the night.” One day when, at Combray, I had spoken of this
coast, this Balbec, before M. Swann, hoping to learn from him whether it
was the best point to select for seeing the most violent storms, he had
replied: “I should think I did know Balbec! The church at Balbec, built in
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, and still half romanesque, is
perhaps the most curious example to be found of our Norman gothic, and so
exceptional that one is tempted to describe it as Persian in its
inspiration.” And that region, which, until then, had seemed to me to be
nothing else than a part of immemorial nature, that had remained
contemporaneous with the great phenomena of geology–and as remote from
human history as the Ocean itself, or the Great Bear, with its wild race
of fishermen for whom, no more than for their whales, had there been any
Middle Ages–it had been a great joy to me to see it suddenly take its
place in the order of the centuries, with a stored consciousness of the
romanesque epoch, and to know that the gothic trefoil had come to
diversify those wild rocks also, at the appointed hour, like those frail
but hardy plants which, in the Polar regions, when the spring returns,
scatter their stars about the eternal snows. And if gothic art brought to
those places and people a classification which, otherwise, they lacked,
they too conferred one upon it in return. I tried to form a picture in my
mind of how those fishermen had lived, the timid and unsuspected essay
towards social intercourse which they had attempted there, clustered upon
a promontory of the shores of Hell, at the foot of the cliffs of death;
and gothic art seemed to me a more living thing now that, detaching it
from the towns in which, until then, I had always imagined it, I could see
how, in a particular instance, upon a reef of savage rocks, it had taken
root and grown until it flowered in a tapering spire. I was taken to see
reproductions of the most famous of the statues at Balbec,–shaggy,
blunt-faced Apostles, the Virgin from the porch,–and I could scarcely
breathe for joy at the thought that I might myself, one day, see them take
a solid form against their eternal background of salt fog. Thereafter, on
dear, tempestuous February nights, the wind–- breathing into my heart,
which it shook no less violently than the chimney of my bedroom, the
project of a visit to Balbec–blended in me the desire for gothic
architecture with that for a storm upon the sea.
I should have liked to take, the very next day, the good, the generous
train at one twenty-two, of which never without a palpitating heart could
I read, in the railway company’s bills or in advertisements of circular
tours, the hour of departure: it seemed to me to cut, at a precise point
in every afternoon, a most fascinating groove, a mysterious mark, from
which the diverted hours still led one on, of course, towards evening,
towards to-morrow morning, but to an evening and morning which one would
behold, not in Paris but in one of those towns through which the train
passed and among which it allowed one to choose; for it stopped at Bayeux,
at Coutances, at Vitré, at Questambert, at Pontorson, at Balbec, at
Lannion, at Lamballe, at Benodet, at Pont-Aven, at Quimperle, and
progressed magnificently surcharged with names which it offered me, so
that, among them all, I did not know which to choose, so impossible was it
to sacrifice any. But even without waiting for the train next day, I
could, by rising and dressing myself with all speed, leave Paris that very
evening, should my parents permit, and arrive at Balbec as dawn spread
westward over the raging sea, from whose driven foam I would seek shelter
in that church in the Persian manner. But at the approach of the Easter
holidays, when my parents bad promised to let me spend them, for once, in
the North of Italy, lo! in place of those dreams of tempests, by which I
had been entirely possessed, not wishing to see anything but waves dashing
in from all sides, mounting always higher, upon the wildest of coasts,
beside churches as rugged and precipitous as cliffs, in whose towers the
sea-birds would be wailing; suddenly, effacing them, taking away all their
charm, excluding them because they were its opposite and could only have
weakened its effect, was substituted in me the converse dream of the most
variegated of springs, not the spring of Combray, still pricking with all
the needle-points of the winter’s frost, but that which already covered
with lilies and anemones the meadows of Fiesole, and gave Florence a
dazzling golden background, like those in Fra Angelico’s pictures. From
that moment, only sunlight, perfumes, colours, seemed to me to have any
value; for this alternation of images had effected a change of front in my
desire, and–as abrupt as those that occur sometimes in music,–a complete
change of tone in my sensibility. Thus it came about that a mere
atmospheric variation would be sufficient to provoke in me that
modulation, without there being any need for me to await the return of a
season. For often we find a day, in one, that has strayed from another
season, and makes us live in that other, summons at once into our presence
and makes us long for its peculiar pleasures, and interrupts the dreams
that we were in process of weaving, by inserting, out of its turn, too
early or too late, this leaf, torn from another chapter, in the
interpolated calendar of Happiness. But soon it happened that, like those
natural phenomena from which our comfort or our health can derive but an
accidental and all too modest benefit, until the day when science takes
control of them, and, producing them at will, places in our hands the
power to order their appearance, withdrawn from the tutelage and
independent of the consent of chance; similarly the production of these
dreams of the Atlantic and of Italy ceased to depend entirely upon the
changes of the seasons and of the weather. I need only, to make them
reappear, pronounce the names: Balbec, Venice, Florence, within whose
syllables had gradually accumulated all the longing inspired in me by the
places for which they stood. Even in spring, to come in a book upon the
name of Balbec sufficed to awaken in me the desire for storms at sea and
for the Norman gothic; even on a stormy day the name of Florence or of
Venice would awaken the desire for sunshine, for lilies, for the Palace of
the Doges and for Santa Maria del Fiore.
But if their names thus permanently absorbed the image that I had formed
of these towns, it was only by transforming that image, by subordinating
its reappearance in me to their own special laws; and in consequence of
this they made it more beautiful, but at the same time more different from
anything that the towns of Normandy or Tuscany could in reality be, and,
by increasing the arbitrary delights of my imagination, aggravated the
disenchantment that was in store for me when I set out upon my travels.
They magnified the idea that I formed of certain points on the earth’s
surface, making them more special, and in consequence more real. I did not
then represent to myself towns, landscapes, historic buildings, as
pictures more or less attractive, cut out here and there of a substance
that was common to them all, but looked on each of them as on an unknown
thing, different from all the rest, a thing for which my soul was athirst,
by the knowledge of which it would benefit. How much more individual still
was the character that they assumed from being designated by names, names
that were only for themselves, proper names such as people have. Words
present to us little pictures of things, lucid and normal, like the
pictures that are hung on the walls of schoolrooms to give children an
illustration of what is meant by a carpenter’s bench, a bird, an ant-hill;
things chosen as typical of everything else of the same sort. But names
present to us–of persons and of towns which they accustom us to regard as
individual, as unique, like persons–a confused picture, which draws from
the names, from the brightness or darkness of their sound, the colour in
which it is uniformly painted, like one of those posters, entirely blue or
entirely red, in which, on account of the limitations imposed by the
process used in their reproduction, or by a whim on the designer’s part,
are blue or red not only the sky and the sea, but the ships and the church
and the people in the streets. The name of Parma, one of the towns that I
most longed to visit, after reading the Chartreuse, seeming to me
compact and glossy, violet-tinted, soft, if anyone were to speak of such
or such a house in Parma, in which I should be lodged, he would give me
the pleasure of thinking that I was to inhabit a dwelling that was compact
and glossy, violet-tinted, soft, and that bore no relation to the houses
in any other town in Italy, since I could imagine it only by the aid of
that heavy syllable of the name of Parma, in which no breath of air
stirred, and of all that I had made it assume of Stendhalian sweetness and
the reflected hue of violets. And when I thought of Florence, it was of a
town miraculously embalmed, and flower-like, since it was called the City
of the Lilies, and its Cathedral, Our Lady of the Flower. As for Balbec,
it was one of those names in which, as on an old piece of Norman pottery
that still keeps the colour of the earth from which it was fashioned, one
sees depicted still the representation of some long-abolished custom, of
some feudal right, of the former condition of some place, of an obsolete
way of pronouncing the language, which had shaped and wedded its
incongruous syllables and which I never doubted that I should find spoken
there at once, even by the inn-keeper who would pour me out coffee and
milk on my arrival, taking me down to watch the turbulent sea, unchained,
before the church; to whom I lent the aspect, disputatious, solemn and
mediaeval, of some character in one of the old romances.
Had my health definitely improved, had my parents allowed me, if not
actually to go down to stay at Balbec, at least to take, just once, so as
to become acquainted with the architecture and landscapes of Normandy or
of Brittany, that one twenty-two train into which I had so often clambered
in imagination, I should have preferred to stop, and to alight from it, at
the most beautiful of its towns; but in vain might I compare and contrast
them; how was one to choose, any more than between individual people, who
are not interchangeable, between Bayeux, so lofty in its noble coronet of
rusty lace, whose highest point caught the light of the old gold of its
second syllable; Vitré, whose acute accent barred its ancient glass with
wooden lozenges; gentle Lamballe, whose whiteness ranged from egg-shell
yellow to a pearly grey; Coutances, a Norman Cathedral, which its final
consonants, rich and yellowing, crowned with a tower of butter; Lannion
with the rumble and buzz, in the silence of its village street, of the fly
on the wheel of the coach; Questambert, Pontorson, ridiculously silly and
simple, white feathers and yellow beaks strewn along the road to those
well-watered and poetic spots; Benodet, a name scarcely moored that seemed
to be striving to draw the river down into the tangle of its seaweeds;
Pont-Aven, the snowy, rosy flight of the wing of a lightly poised coif,
tremulously reflected in the greenish waters of a canal; Quimperlé, more
firmly attached, this, and since the Middle Ages, among the rivulets with
which it babbled, threading their pearls upon a grey background, like the
pattern made, through the cobwebs upon a window, by rays of sunlight
changed into blunt points of tarnished silver?
These images were false for another reason also; namely, that they were
necessarily much simplified; doubtless the object to which my imagination
aspired, which my senses took in but incompletely and without any
immediate pleasure, I had committed to the safe custody of names;
doubtless because I had accumulated there a store of dreams, those names
now magnetised my desires; but names themselves are not very
comprehensive; the most that I could do was to include in each of them two
or three of the principal curiosities of the town, which would lie there
side by side, without interval or partition; in the name of Balbec, as in
the magnifying glasses set in those penholders which one buys at sea-side
places, I could distinguish waves surging round a church built in the
Persian manner.  Perhaps, indeed, the enforced simplicity of these images
was one of the reasons for the hold that they had over me. When my father
had decided, one year, that we should go for the Easter holidays to
Florence and Venice, not finding room to introduce into the name of
Florence the elements that ordinarily constitute a town, I was obliged to
let a supernatural city emerge from the impregnation by certain vernal
scenes of what I supposed to be, in its essentials, the genius of Giotto.
All the more–and because one cannot make a name extend much further in
time than in space–like some of Giotto’s paintings themselves which shew
us at two separate moments the same person engaged in different actions,
here lying on his bed, there just about to mount his horse, the name of
Florence was divided into two compartments. In one, beneath an
architectural dais, I gazed upon a fresco over which was partly drawn a
curtain of morning sunlight, dusty, aslant, and gradually spreading; in
the other (for, since I thought of names not as an inaccessible ideal but
as a real and enveloping substance into which I was about to plunge, the
life not yet lived, the life intact and pure which I enclosed in them,
gave to the most material pleasures, to the simplest scenes, the same
attraction that they have in the works of the Primitives), I moved
swiftly–so as to arrive, as soon as might be, at the table that was
spread for me, with fruit and a flask of Chianti–across a Ponte Vecchio
heaped with jonquils, narcissi and anemones.  That (for all that I was
still in Paris) was what I saw, and not what was actually round about me.
Even from the simplest, the most realistic point of view, the countries
for which we long occupy, at any given moment, a far larger place in our
true life than the country in which we may happen to be. Doubtless, if, at
that time, I had paid more attention to what was in my mind when I
pronounced the words “going to Florence, to Parma, to Pisa, to Venice,” I
should have realised that what I saw was in no sense a town, but something
as different from anything that I knew, something as delicious as might be
for a human race whose whole existence had passed in a series of late
winter afternoons, that inconceivable marvel, a morning in spring. These
images, unreal, fixed, always alike, filling all my nights and days,
differentiated this period in my life from those which had gone before it
(and might easily have been confused with it by an observer who saw things
only from without, that is to say, who saw nothing), as in an opera a
fresh melody introduces a novel atmosphere which one could never have
suspected if one had done no more than read the libretto, still less if
one had remained outside the theatre, counting only the minutes as they
passed. And besides, even from the point of view of mere quantity, in our
life the days are not all equal. To reach the end of a day, natures that
are slightly nervous, as mine was, make use, like motor-cars, of different
’speeds.’ There are mountainous, uncomfortable days, up which one takes an
infinite time to pass, and days downward sloping, through which one can go
at full tilt, singing as one goes. During this month–in which I went
laboriously over, as over a tune, though never to my satisfaction, these
visions of Florence, Venice, Pisa, from which the desire that they excited
in me drew and kept something as profoundly personal as if it had been
love, love for another person–I never ceased to believe that they
corresponded to a reality independent of myself, and they made me
conscious of as glorious a hope as could have been cherished by a
Christian in the primitive age of faith, on the eve of his entry into
Paradise. Moreover, without my paying any heed to the contradiction that
there was in my wishing to look at and to touch with my organs of sense
what had been elaborated by the spell of my dreams and not perceived by my
senses at all–though all the more tempting to them, in consequence, more
different from anything that they knew–it was that which recalled to me
the reality of these visions, which inflamed my desire all the more by
seeming to hint a promise that my desire should be satisfied. And for all
that the motive force of my exaltation was a longing for aesthetic
enjoyments, the guide-books ministered even more to it than books on
aesthetics, and, more again than the guide-books, the railway time-tables.
What moved me was the thought that this Florence which I could see, so
near and yet inaccessible, in my imagination, if the tract which separated
it from me, in myself, was not one that I might cross, could yet be
reached by a circuit, by a digression, were I to take the plain,
terrestrial path. When I repeated to myself, giving thus a special value
to what I was going to see, that Venice was the “School of Giorgione, the
home of Titian, the most complete museum of the domestic architecture of
the Middle Ages,” I felt happy indeed. As I was even more when, on one of
my walks, as I stepped out briskly on account of the weather, which, after
several days of a precocious spring, had relapsed into winter (like the
weather that we had invariably found awaiting us at Combray, in Holy
Week),–seeing upon the boulevards that the chestnut-trees, though plunged
in a glacial atmosphere that soaked through them like a stream of water,
were none the less beginning, punctual guests, arrayed already for the
party, and admitting no discouragement, to shape and chisel and curve in
its frozen lumps the irrepressible verdure whose steady growth the
abortive power of the cold might hinder but could not succeed in
restraining–I reflected that already the Ponte Vecchio was heaped high
with an abundance of hyacinths and anemones, and that the spring sunshine
was already tinging the waves of the Grand Canal with so dusky an azure,
with emeralds so splendid that when they washed and were broken against
the foot of one of Titian’s paintings they could vie with it in the
richness of their colouring. I could no longer contain my joy when my
father, in the intervals of tapping the barometer and complaining of the
cold, began to look out which were the best trains, and when I understood
that by making one’s way, after luncheon, into the coal-grimed laboratory,
the wizard’s cell that undertook to contrive a complete transmutation of
its surroundings, one could awaken, next morning, in the city of marble
and gold, in which “the building of the wall was of jasper and the
foundation of the wall an emerald.” So that it and the City of the Lilies
were not just artificial scenes which I could set up at my pleasure in
front of my imagination, but did actually exist at a certain distance from
Paris which must inevitably be traversed if I wished to see them, at their
appointed place on the earth’s surface, and at no other; in a word they
were entirely real. They became even more real to me when my father, by
saying: “Well, you can stay in Venice from the 20th to the 29th, and reach
Florence on Easter morning,” made them both emerge, no longer only from
the abstraction of Space, but from that imaginary Time in which we place
not one, merely, but several of our travels at once, which do not greatly
tax us since they are but possibilities,–that Time which reconstructs
itself so effectively that one can spend it again in one town after one
has already spent it in another–and consecrated to them some of those
actual, calendar days which are certificates of the genuineness of what
one does on them, for those unique days are consumed by being used, they
do not return, one cannot live them again here when one has lived them
elsewhere; I felt that it was towards the week that would begin with the
Monday on which the laundress was to bring back the white waistcoat that I
had stained with ink, that they were hastening to busy themselves with the
duty of emerging from that ideal Time in which they did not, as yet,
exist, those two Queen Cities of which I was soon to be able, by the most
absorbing kind of geometry, to inscribe the domes and towers on a page of
my own life. But I was still on the way, only, to the supreme pinnacle of
happiness; I reached it finally (for not until then did the revelation
burst upon me that on the clattering streets, reddened by the light
reflected from Giorgione’s frescoes, it was not, as I had, despite so many
promptings, continued to imagine, the men “majestic and terrible as the
sea, bearing armour that gleamed with bronze beneath the folds of their
blood-red cloaks,” who would be walking in Venice next week, on the Easter
vigil; but that I myself might be the minute personage whom, in an
enlarged photograph of St. Mark’s that had been lent to me, the operator
had portrayed, in a bowler hat, in front of the portico), when I heard my
father say: “It must be pretty cold, still, on the Grand Canal; whatever
you do, don’t forget to pack your winter greatcoat and your thick suit."
At these words I was raised to a sort of ecstasy; a thing that I had until
then deemed impossible, I felt myself to be penetrating indeed between
those “rocks of amethyst, like a reef in the Indian Ocean"; by a supreme
muscular effort, a long way in excess of my real strength, stripping
myself, as of a shell that served no purpose, of the air in my own room
which surrounded me, I replaced it by an equal quantity of Venetian air,
that marine atmosphere, indescribable and peculiar as the atmosphere of
the dreams which my imagination had secreted in the name of Venice; I
could feel at work within me a miraculous disincarnation; it was at once
accompanied by that vague desire to vomit which one feels when one has a
very sore throat; and they had to put me to bed with a fever so persistent
that the doctor not only assured my parents that a visit, that spring, to
Florence and Venice was absolutely out of the question, but warned their
that, even when I should have completely recovered, I must, for at least a
year, give up all idea of travelling, and be kept from anything that wa;
liable to excite me.
And, alas, he forbade also, most categorically, my being allowed to go to
the theatre, to hear Berma; the sublime artist, whose genius Bergotte had
proclaimed, might, by introducing me to something else that was, perhaps,
as important and as beautiful, have consoled me for not having been to
Florence and Venice, for not going to Balbec. My parents had to be content
with sending me, every day, to the Champs-Elysées, in the custody of a
person who would see that I did not tire myself; this person was none
other than Françoise, who had entered our service after the death of my
aunt Léonie. Going to the Champs-Elysées I found unendurable.  If only
Bergotte had described the place in one of his books, I should, no doubt,
have longed to see and to know it, like so many things else of which a
simulacrum had first found its way into my imagination.  That kept things
warm, made them live, gave them personality, and I sought then to find
their counterpart in reality, but in this public garden there was nothing
that attached itself to my dreams.
Continue...

This full text of Swann’s Way (Vol. 1 of “Remembrance of Things Past”)
by Marcel Proust, translated from the French by C. K. Scott
Moncrieff (1922), is in the public domain. Thanks to Project Gutenberg for
bringing books to the digital world in the form of electronic texts.
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Also see ">Swann’s Way I.

Page last updated on February 2004.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
