

Drawing of the Mayflower
From the collection of the
Cape Cod Pilgrim Memorial Association





1. While the great sovereigns of Europe were busy in fighting the
Moslems in Palestine, they did not entirely neglect affairs at home.
Some of them were very good rulers, protecting their subjects and
maintaining good order, and others were tyrannical and imposed all
sorts of taxes and heavy burdens upon the people. Up among the Alps,
where the country is made up of rough, rocky mountains and narrow
valleys, lived a people who were practically free. They lived in
little communities, each one of which elected its own magistrate or
governor, and made its own laws. The region was so poor and rough that
the neighboring kings little cared to get possession of it, and the
Alpine dwellers had a greater amount of freedom than any other people
of Europe. The country was divided into little separate communities,
one of which was called Schwytz, and this afterward gave the name to
the whole country–Switzerland.
2. This country of the Swiss was really a part of the German empire,
but the emperors had extended their rule over the lower parts of the
country, leaving the forest cantons free. And a brave, courageous, and
industrious people grew up there. No pauper-house among the Alps, for
every able-bodied person worked, and no body tried to rob his neighbor
of his honest earnings. They were a strong athletic race, and the
monarchs of the surrounding countries were glad to secure Swiss
soldiers, for it was said that the Swiss never deserted. In 1298,
while Wallace was struggling for freedom in Scotland, Albert of
Austria, the second of the house of Hapsburg, resolved to get
possession of the free forest cantons. He observed great secrecy in
carrying out his designs, and it was not until a tax-gatherer or
bailiff was permanently established in the country, supported by
Austrian soldiers, that the people awakened to their danger. The story
that follows is one that all true Swiss delight to believe, and,
though it may not be true in regard to names and details, yet as a
record of the main incidents of history it is substantially correct.
3. The first Austrian bailiff was Hermann Gessler, who built a strong
fortress at Küssnacht, in Uri. At first he professed great love for
the people, but when he became firmly established he threw off the
mask, and showed himself to be a cruel, cowardly, mean-spirited
tyrant. He was both vain and greedy, and he exacted both homage and
tribute from the surrounding peasantry. Property was seized by the
soldiers, and, should the owner venture to remonstrate, he was
mercilessly beaten or killed on the spot. Complaints to the governor
were followed by fresh outrages, until no one, even in the most
secluded valleys, considered himself safe. Here tyranny as usual
overstepped the bounds of safety. The free spirit, born of toil and
privations in the mountain-fastnesses, would not long endure the
outrages to which the people were subjected. A leader only was needed
to induce a general revolt, and this leader was found in the person of
William Tell.
4. William Tell, according to the received accounts, was born at
Bürgelen, a secluded hamlet in the canton of Uri, near the lake of
Lucerne, about the year 1275; and, like his forefathers, was the
proprietor of a cottage, a few small fields, a vineyard, and an
orchard. When William had reached the age of twenty, his father is
said to have died, bequeathing to him these humble possessions.
Endowed by nature with a lofty and energetic mind, Tell was
distinguished also by great physical strength and manly beauty. He was
taller by a head than most of his companions; he loved to climb the
rugged rocks of his native mountains in pursuit of the chamois, and to
steer his boat across the lake in time of storm and of danger. The
load of wood which he could bear upon his shoulders was double that
which any ordinary man could support.
5. With other sources of happiness, Tell combined that of possessing
an intimate friend, who dwelt amid the rocky heights separating Uri
from Unterwalden. Arnold Auderhalden, of Melchthal, was this
associate. Although similar in many salient points of character, there
was still an essential difference between the two men. Arnold, of
Melchthal, while he loved his country with an ardor equal to that of
Tell, and was capable of very great actions, was not prepared for much
patient suffering or long endurance of wrong. Tell, whose temperament
was more calm, and whose passions were more influenced by reason than
impulse, only succeeded in restraining his friend’s impulsive
character by the stern force of example. Meantime the two friends
passed their days in the enjoyment of one another’s society, visiting
at intervals each other’s humble residence. Tell foresaw, on the
arrival of Gessler, many of the misfortunes which must inevitably
follow his iron rule, and without explaining his views even to Arnold,
of Melchthal, without needlessly alarming his family, endeavored to
devise some means, not of bearing the yoke patiently, but of
delivering his country from the galling oppression which Albert had
brought upon it. The hero felt satisfied that the evil deeds of the
governor would sooner or later bring just retribution upon him; for
this, and many other reasons, therefore, despite his own secret
wishes, when Arnold poured out his fiery wrath in the ear of his
friend, he listened calmly, and, to avoid inflaming him more, avowed
none of his own views, or even feelings, in return.
6. One evening, however, William Tell and his wife sat in front of
their cottage, watching their son amusing himself amid the flocks,
when the former grew more thoughtful and sad than usual. Presently
Tell spoke, and for the first time imparted to his wife some of his
most secret designs. While the conversation was still proceeding, the
parents saw their son rush toward them crying for help, and shouting
the name of old Melchthal. As he spoke, Arnold’s father appeared in
sight, led by his grand-child, and feeling his way with a stick. Tell
and his wife hastened forward, and discovered, to their inconceivable
horror, that their friend was blind, his eyes having been put out with
hot irons. The hero of Bürgelen, burning with just indignation, called
on the old man to explain the fearful sight, and also the cause of
Arnold’s absence.
7. It appeared that that very morning the father, son, and
grand-daughter were in the fields loading a couple of oxen with
produce for the market-town, when an Austrian soldier presented
himself, and, having examined the animals, which appeared to suit his
fancy, ordered their owner to unyoke the beasts preparatory to his
driving them off. Adding insolence to tyranny, he further remarked
that such clod-poles might very well draw their own plows and carts.
Arnold, furious at the man’s daring impertinence, was only restrained
by his father’s earnest entreaties from sacrificing the robber on the
spot; nothing, however, could prevent him from aiming a blow at the
soldier, which broke two of his fingers.
8. The enraged soldier then retreated; but old Melchthal, who well
knew the character of Gessler, immediately forced Arnold, much against
his inclination, to go and conceal himself for some days in the Righi.
Scarcely had Arnold departed in this direction, when a detachment of
guards from Altorf surrounded their humble tenement, and dragged old
Melchthal before Gessler, who ordered him to give up his son. Furious
at the refusal which ensued, the tyrant commanded the old man’s eyes
to be put out, and then sent him forth blind to deplore his
misfortunes.
9. Tell heard the story of Melchthal in silence, and, when he had
finished, inquired the exact spot of his son’s concealment. The father
replied that it was in a particular cavern of Mount Righi, the desert
rocks of which place are unknown to the emissaries of the governor,
and there he had promised to remain until he received his parent’s
permission to come forth. This Tell requested might be granted
immediately; and, turning to his son, ordered him to start at once for
the Righi with a message to Arnold. Walter obeyed gladly; and,
providing himself with food, and receiving private instructions from
his father, went on his journey under cover of the night.
10. Tell himself then threw around his own person a cloak of
wolf-skin, seized his quiver full of sharp arrows, and, taking his
terrible bow, which few could bend, in hand, bade adieu to his wife
for a few days, and took his departure in an opposite direction from
that pursued by his son. It was quite dawn when Walter reached the
Righi, and a slight column of blue smoke speedily directed him to the
spot where Arnold lay concealed. The intrusion at first startled the
fugitive; but, recognizing Tell’s son, he listened eagerly to his
dismal story, the conclusion of which roused in him so much fury that
he would have rushed forth at once to assassinate Gessler had not
Walter restrained him.
11. Schooled by Tell, he informed him that his father was engaged in
preparing vengeance for the tyrant’s crime, being at that moment with
Werner Stauffacher concerting proper measures of resistance. “’Go,’
said my father, ’and tell Arnold of this new villany of the
governor’s, and say that it is not rage which can give us just
revenge, but the utmost exertion of courage and prudence. I leave
Schwytz to bid Werner arm his canton: let Melchthal go to Stautz and
prepare the men of Unterwalden for the outbreak; having done this, let
him meet me, with Fürst and Werner, in the field of Grütli!’”
12. Arnold, scarcely taking time to refresh himself with food, sent
Walter on his homeward journey, while he started for Stautz. Walter,
when alone, turned his steps toward Altorf, where unfortunately, and
unknown to himself, he came into the presence of Gessler, to whom he
uttered somewhat hard things about the state of the country, being led
to commit himself by the artful questions of the tyrant, who
immediately ordered the lad into confinement, with strict injunctions
to the guards to seize whomsoever should claim him.
13. Meanwhile, certain doubts and fears, from he knew not what cause,
arose in the mind of Gessler, and struck him with a presentiment that
all was not right. He imagined that the people wore in their looks
less abject submission to his authority, and, the better to satisfy
himself of the correctness or erroneousness of this view, he commanded
Berenger to erect at dawn of day, in the market-place of Altorf, a
pole, on the point of which he was to place the ducal cap of Austria.
An order was further promulgated, to the effect that every one passing
near or within sight of it should make obeisance, in proof of his
honor and fealty to the duke.
14. Numerous soldiers under arms were directed to surround the place,
to keep the avenues, and to compel the passers-by to bend with proper
respect to the emblem of the governing power of the three cantons.
Gessler likewise determined that whoever should disobey the mandate
should be accused of disaffection, and treated accordingly; a measure
which promised both to discover the discontented, and furnish
sufficient grounds for their punishment. Numerous detachments of
troops, among whom money had been previously distributed, were then
placed around to see that his commands were scrupulously obeyed.
History scarcely records another instance of tyranny so galling and
humiliating to the oppressed, and so insolent on the part of its
author.
15. The proceedings of Tell in the interval were of the deepest
concern to the country. Having arrived within the territory of
Schwytz, and at the village of Stainea, he called at the house of
Werner, and, being admitted, threw at his feet a heavy bundle of
lances, arrows, cross-bows, and swords. “Werner Stauffacher,” cried
Tell, “the time is come for action!” and without a moment’s delay he
informed his friend of all that had passed, dwelling minutely on every
detail. And, when he had at length finished, the cautious Werner could
restrain his wrath no longer, but exclaimed, clasping the hero’s hand,
“Friend, let us begin; I am ready!” After further brief conference,
they, by separate ways, carried round arms to their friends in the
town and neighboring villages. Many hours were thus consumed; and,
when their weapons were at last distributed, they both returned to
Stauffacher’s house, snatched some slight refreshment, and then sped
on their way to Grütli, accompanied by ten of their most tried
adherents.
16. The lake of Lucerne was soon reached, and a boat procured. Werner,
perceiving the furious tempest, inquired of Tell if his skill would
enable him to struggle against the storm. “Arnold awaits us!” cried
William; “and the fate of our country depends on this interview!” With
these words he leaped into the boat, Werner jumped after him, and the
rest followed. Tell cast loose the agitated vessel, seized the tiller,
and, hoisting sail, the little craft flew along the waves.
17. Presently, it is said, the wind moderated, and ere they reached
the opposite side had ceased altogether–a phenomenon common in these
mountain lakes. The boat was now made fast, and the conspirators
hastened to the field of Grütli, where, at the mouth of a cavern of
the same name, Arnold and Walter Fürst awaited them, each with ten
other companions. Tell allowed no consideration of natural feeling to
silence the calls of duty, but at once came to the point. He first
gave a brief sketch of the state of the country under the Austrian
bailiffs, and, having shown to the satisfaction of his companions the
necessity for immediate and combined action, is related to have added:
“We may have our plans frustrated by delay, and the time has come for
action. I ask only a few days for preparation. Unterwalden and Schwytz
are armed. Three hundred and fifty warriors are, I am assured, ready.
I will remain in Altorf, and, as soon as I receive tidings from Fürst,
will fire a huge pile of wood near my house. At this signal let all
march to the rendezvous, and, when united, we will pour down upon
Altorf, where I will then strive to rouse the people!”
18. This plan of the campaign was agreed to; and it was further
resolved that, in the enterprise upon which they were now embarked, no
one should be guided by his own private opinion, nor ever forsake his
friends; that they should jointly live or jointly die in defense of
the common cause; that each should in his own vicinity promote the
object in view, trusting that the whole nation would one day have
cause to bless their friendly union; that the Count of Hapsburg should
be deprived of none of his lands, vassals, or prerogatives; that the
freedom which they had inherited from their fathers they were
determined to assert, and to hand down to their children untainted and
undiminished. Then Stauffacher, Fürst, and Melcthal, and the other
conspirators, stepped forward, and, raising their hands, swore that
they would die in defense of that freedom. After this solemn oath, and
after an agreement that New Year’s Day should be chosen for the
outbreak, unless, in the meantime, a signal fire should arouse the
inhabitants on some sudden emergency, the heroes separated. Arnold
returned to Stautz, Werner to Schwytz, while Tell and Fürst took their
way to Altorf. The sun already shone brightly as Tell entered the
town, and he at once advanced into the public place, where the first
object which caught his eye was a handsome cap embroidered with gold
stuck upon the end of a long pole. Soldiers walked around it in
respectful silence, and the people of Altorf, as they passed, bowed
their heads profoundly to the symbol of power.
19. Tell was much surprised at this new and strange manifestation of
servility, and, leaning on his cross-bow, gazed contemptuously both on
the people and the soldiers. Berenger, captain of the guard, at length
observed this man, who alone, amid a cringing populace, carried his
head erect. He went to him, and fiercely asked why he neglected to pay
obedience to the orders of Hermann Gessler? Tell replied that he saw
no reason why he should bow to a hat, or even to the one which the hat
represented. This bold language surprised Berenger, who ordered Tell
to be disarmed, and then, surrounded by guards, he was carried before
the governor. “Wherefore,” demanded the incensed bailiff, “Hast thou
disobeyed my orders, and failed in thy respect to the emperor? Why
hast thou dared to pass before the sacred badge of thy sovereign
without the evidence of homage required of thee?” “Verily,” answered
Tell, with mock humility, “how this happened I know not; ’tis an
accident, and no mark of contempt. Suffer me, therefore, in thy
clemency to depart.”
20. Gessler was irritated at this reply, feeling assured that there
was something beneath the tranquil and bitter smile of the prisoner
which he could not fathom. Suddenly he was struck by the resemblance
which existed between him and the boy Walter, whom he had met the
previous day, and immediately ordered him to be brought forward.
21. Gessler now inquired the prisoner’s name, which he no sooner
learned than he recognized as that of the archer so celebrated
throughout the canton. As soon as the youth arrived, the governor
turned to Tell and told him that he had heard of his extraordinary
dexterity, and was accordingly determined to put it to proof. “While
beholding justice done, the people of Altorf shall also admire thy
skill. Thy son shall be placed a hundred yards distant, with an apple
on his head; if thou hast the good fortune to carry off the apple in
triumph with one of thy arrows, I pardon both, and restore your
liberty. If thou refusest this trial, thy son shall die before thine
eyes!”
22. Tell implored Gessler to spare him so cruel an experiment, but,
finding the governor inexorable, the hero submitted to the trial. He
was conducted into the public place, where the required distance was
measured by Berenger–a double row of soldiers shutting up three sides
of the square. The people, awe-stricken and trembling, pressed behind.
Walter stood with his back to a linden tree, patiently awaiting the
exciting moment. Hermann Gessler, some distance behind, watched every
motion. His cross-bow and belt were handed to Tell; he tried the
point, broke the weapon, and demanded his quiver. It was brought to
him, and emptied at his feet. William stooped down, and, taking a long
time to choose one, managed to hide a second in his girdle; the other
he held in his hand, and proceeded to string his bow, while Berenger
cleared away the remaining arrows. After hesitating, he drew the bow,
aimed, shot, and the apple, struck through the core, was carried away
by the arrow.
23. The market-place was filled by loud cries of admiration. Walter
flew to embrace his father, who, overcome by the excess of his
emotions, fell insensible to the ground, thus exposing the second
arrow to view. Gessler stood over him awaiting his recovery, which
speedily took place. Tell rose, and turned away from the governor,
who, however, thus addressed him: “Incomparable archer! I will keep my
promise; but,” added he, “tell me what needed you with that second
arrow which you have, I see, secreted in your girdle? One was surely
enough.” “The second shaft,” replied Tell, “was to pierce thy heart,
tyrant, if I had chanced to harm my son!” At these words the terrified
governor retired behind his guards, revoked his promise of pardon,
commanding him further to be placed in irons, and to be reconducted to
the fort. He was obeyed, and, as slight murmurs rose among the people,
double patrols of Austrian soldiers paraded the streets, and forced
the citizens to retire to their houses. Walter, released, fled to join
Arnold, of Melchthal, according to a whispered order from his father.
24. Gessler, reflecting on the aspect of the people, and fearful that
some plot was in progress, which his accidental shortness of
provisions rendered more unfortunate, determined to rid his citadel of
the object which might induce an attack. With this in view, he
summoned Berenger, and said to him: “I am about to leave Altorf, and
you shall command during my absence. I leave my brave soldiers, who
will readily obey your voice; and soon, returning with supplies and
reinforcements, we will crush this vile people, and punish them for
their insolent murmurings. Prepare me a large boat, in which thirty
men, picked from my guard, may depart with me. As soon as night comes
on, load this audacious Tell with chains, and send him on board. I
will myself take him where he can expiate his crimes!”
25. The evening was fine and promising; the boat danced along the
placid waters. The air was pure, the waves tranquil, the stars shone
brightly in the sky. A light southern breeze aided the efforts of the
oarsmen, and tempered the rigor of the cold, which night in that
season rendered almost insupportable so near the glaciers. All
appeared in Gessler’s favor. The extent of the first section of the
lake was soon passed, and the boat headed for Brunnen. Tell, meantime,
loaded with irons, gazed with eager eye on the desert rocks of Grütli,
where the day before he had planned with his friends for the
deliverance of his country. While painful thoughts crossed his mind,
his looks were attracted by a dim light which burst forth near his own
house. Presently this light increased, and before long a blaze arose
visible all over Uri. The heart of the prisoner beat with joy, for he
felt that all efforts were making to rescue him. Gessler observed the
flame, which in reality was a signal-fire to arouse the cantons, but
supposed it some Swiss peasant’s house accidentally in flames.
26. Suddenly, however, between Fluelen and Sissigen, when in deep
water, intermingled with shoals, the south wind ceased to blow, and
one of those storms which are common on the lake commenced. A north
wind burst upon them, raised the waves to a great height, and dashed
them over the gunwale of the boat, which, giving way to the fury of
the storm, flew toward the shore that, rocky and precipitous, menaced
their lives. The bleak wind brought also frost, snow, and sleet, which
spread darkness over the waters, and covered the hands and faces of
the rowers with ice. The soldiers, inert and panic-stricken, prayed
for life, while Gessler, but ill prepared for death, was profuse in
his offers of money and other rewards if they would rouse themselves
to save him.
27. In this emergency the Austrian bailiff was reminded by one of his
attendants that the prisoner Tell was no less skillful in the
management of a boat than in the exercise of the bow. “And, see, my
lord,” said one of the men, representing to Gessler the imminent peril
they were all incurring, “all are paralyzed with terror, and even the
pilot is unable to manage the helm!”
28. Gessler’s fear of Tell induced him at first to hesitate, but, the
prayers of the soldiers becoming pressing, he told the prisoner that
if he could take them safely through the storm he should be at once
unbound. Tell having replied that, by the grace of God, he could still
save them, was instantly freed from his shackles and placed at the
helm, when the boat, answering to a master-hand, kept its course
steadily through the bellowing surge, as if conscious of the free
spirit which had now taken the command.
29. Guiding the obedient tiller at his will, Tell pointed the head of
the boat in the direction whence they came, which he knew to be the
only safe course; and, encouraging and cheering the rowers, made rapid
and steady progress through the water. The darkness which now wrapped
them round prevented Gessler from discovering that he had turned his
back on his destination. Tell continued on his way nearly the whole
night, the dying light of the signal-fire on the mountain serving as a
beacon in enabling him to approach the shores of Schwytz, and to avoid
the shoals.
30. Between Sissigen and Fluelen are two mountains, the greater and
the lesser Achsenberg, whose sides, hemmed in and rising
perpendicularly from the bed of the lake, offer not a single platform
where human foot can stand. When near this place dawn broke in the
eastern sky, and Gessler–the danger appearing to decrease–scowled
upon Tell in sullen silence. As the prow of the vessel was driven
inland, Tell perceived a solitary table-rock, and called to the
rowers to redouble their efforts till they should have passed the
precipice ahead, observing with ominous truth that it was the most
dangerous point on the whole lake.
31. The soldiers here recognized their position, and pointed it out to
Gessler, who demanded of Tell what he meant by taking them back to
Altorf. William, without answering him, brought the bow suddenly close
upon the rock, seized his bow, and, with an effort which sent the
unguided craft back into the lake, sprang on shore, scaled the rocks,
and took the direction of Schwytz.
32. Having thus escaped the clutches of the governor, he made for the
main road between Art and Küssnacht, and there hid himself until such
a time as the bailiff should pass that way. Gessler and his attendants
having, with great difficulty, effected a landing at Brunnen,
proceeded toward Küssnacht. In the spot still known as “the hollow
way,” and marked by a chapel, Tell overheard the threats pronounced
against himself should he once more be caught, and, in default of his
apprehension, vengeance was vowed against his family. Tell felt that
the safety of himself and his wife and children, to say nothing of the
duty he owed to his country, required the tyrant’s death; and, seizing
an arrow, he pierced Gessler to the heart.
33. The bold deed accomplished, the hero effected his escape to
Stemen, where he found Werner Stauffacher preparing to march.
Immediate action was now necessary, but the original decision of the
conspirators remained unchanged. Accordingly, on the morning of New
Year’s Day, 1308, the castle of Rostberg, in Obwalden, was taken
possession of, its keeper, Berenger, of Landasberg, made prisoner, and
compelled to promise that he would never again set foot within the
territory of the three cantons, after which he was allowed to retire
to Lucerne.
34. Stauffacher, the same morning, at the head of the men of Schwytz,
destroyed the fortress of Schwanan, while Tell and the men of Uri took
possession of Altorf. On the following Sunday the deputies of Uri,
Schwytz, and Unterwalden met, and renewed that fraternal league which
has endured to this day.
35. In 1315 Leopold, second son of Albert, determined to punish the
confederate cantons for their revolt, and accordingly marched against
them at the head of a considerable army, accompanied by a numerous
retinue of nobles. Count Otho, of Strasberg, one of his ablest
generals, crossed the Brunig with a body of four thousand men,
intending to attack Upper Unterwalden. The bailiffs of Willisan, of
Wodhausen, and of Lucerne meantime armed a fourth of that number to
make a descent on the lower division of the same canton, while the
emperor in person, at the head of his army of reserve, poured down
from Egerson on Mogarten, in the country of Schwytz, ostentatiously
displaying an extensive supply of rope where with to hang the chiefs
of the rebels.
36. The confederates, in order to oppose this formidable invasion,
occupied a position in the mountains bordering on the convent of Our
Lady of the Hermits. Four hundred men of Uri, and three hundred of
Unterwalden, had effected a junction with the warriors of Schwytz, who
formed the principal force of the little army. Fifty men, banished
from this latter canton, offered themselves to combat beneath their
banner, intending to efface by their valor the remembrance of past
faults. Early on the morning of November 15, 1315, some thousands of
well-armed Austrian knights slowly ascended the hill on which the
Swiss were posted, with the hope of dislodging them; the latter,
however, advanced to meet their enemies, uttering the most terrific
cries. The band of banished men, having precipitated large stones and
fragments of rocks from the hillsides and from overhanging cliffs,
rushed from behind the sheltering influence of a thick fog and threw
the advancing columns into confusion. The Austrians immediately broke
their ranks, and presently a complete rout, with terrible slaughter,
ensued. The flower of the Austrian chivalry perished on the field of
Morgarten, beneath the halberts, arrows, and iron-headed clubs of the
shepherds. Leopold, himself, though he succeeded in gaining the
shattered remnant of his forces, had a narrow escape, while the Swiss,
animated by victory, hastened to Unterwalden, where they defeated
another body of Austrians. In this instance Count Otho had as narrow
an escape as the emperor.
37. After these two well-fought fields, the confederates hastened to
renew their ancient alliance, which was solemnly sworn to in an
assembly held at Brunnen on the eighth day of December.
38. After the battle of Morgarten one canton after another threw off
the Austrian yoke, and joined the forest cantons, until nearly all
Switzerland was joined in a confederacy. A later war waged by Albert
proved disastrous to the Austrian cause, and ended by a further
consolidation of the Swiss cantons. In 1356, seventy years after
Morgarten, the Austrians made another attempt to bring the brave
mountaineers into subjection. An army of nine thousand men, the best
trained soldiers of the empire, under the lead of the Archduke
Leopold, invaded the country. To these the confederates opposed a
force of fourteen hundred. They met in a valley near the lake of
Sempach. The Austrians had learned something of Swiss warfare, and
knew that they stood no chance in a hand-to-hand conflict with the
Swiss, and so they formed their men into squares, with a wall of
bristling spears on every side. Upon this solid mass of men the Swiss
could make no impression. In vain they charged with the fiery courage
which had so often gained them the victory; they could find no
vulnerable point in the serried columns, and it seemed that the brave
mountaineers must all perish, and leave their homes again to the mercy
of the Austrian soldiers. But, when almost in despair, the tide of
battle was turned by the acts of a single Swiss soldier, Arnold
Winkelried, of Unterwalden. He communicated his plan to his immediate
neighbors, and then, rushing forward, he grasped as many of the
Austrian spears as he could reach; and, gathering them together, he
bowed to the ground with the spears buried in his breast. Into the
breach his companions rushed, and with their powerful swords they soon
widened the space, so that the whole Swiss force had room for action.
The Austrians were almost annihilated, Leopold himself being slain.
The poet Montgomery has given the following version of this event:
  39. “Make way for liberty!” he cried;
  “Make way for liberty!” and died.

  40. In arms the Austrian phalanx stood,
  A living wall, a human wood!
  A wall where every conscious stone
  Seemed to its kindred thousands grown;
  A rampart all assaults to bear,
  Till time to dust their frames should wear!
  A wood, like that enchanted grove
  In which with fiends Rinaldo strove,
  Where every silent tree possessed
  A spirit prisoned in its breast,
  Which the first stroke of coming strife
  Would startle into hideous life;
  So dense, so still, the Austrians stood,
  A living wall, a human wood!
  Impregnable their front appears,
  All horrent with projected spears,
  Whose polished points before them shine,
  From flank to flank, one brilliant line,
  Bright as the breakers’ splendors run
  Along the billows, to the sun.

  41. Opposed to these, a hovering band
  Contended for their native land;
  Peasants, whose new-found strength had broke
  From manly necks the ignoble yoke,
  And forged their fetters into swords,
  On equal terms to fight their lords
  And what insurgent rage had gained,
  In many a mortal fray maintained!
  Marshaled at morn at Freedom’s call,
  They come to conquer or to fall,
  Where he who conquered, he who fell,
  Was deemed a dead, or living Tell!
  Such virtue had that patriot breathed,
  So to the soil his soul bequeathed,
  That wheresoe’er his arrows flew,
  Heroes in his own likeness grew,
  And warriors sprang from every sod
  Which his awakening footstep trod.

  42. And now the work of life and death
  Hung on the passing of a breath;
  The fire of conflict burnt within,
  The battle trembled to begin;
  Yet, while the Austrians held their ground,
  Point for attack was nowhere found.
  Where’er the impatient Switzers gazed,
  The unbroken line of lances blazed;
  That line ’twere suicide to meet,
  And perish at their tyrant’s feet
  How could they rest within their graves,
  And leave their homes the homes of slaves?
  Would they not feel their children tread
  With clanging chains above their head?

  43. It must not! This day, this hour,
  Annihilates the oppressor’s power;
  All Switzerland is in the field,
  She will not fly, she can not yield–
  She must not fall; her better fate
  Here gives her an immortal date.
  Few were the numbers she could boast;
  But every freeman was a host,
  And felt as though himself were he
  On whose sole arm hung victory!

  44. It did depend on one, indeed,
  Behold him–Arnold Winkelried
  There sounds not to the tramp of fame
  The echo of a nobler name.
  Unmarked he stood amid the throng,
  In rumination deep and long,
  Till you might see, with sudden grace,
  The very thought come o’er his face,
  And by the motion of his form
  Anticipate the coming storm;
  And by the uplifting of his brow
  Tell where the bolt would strike, and how.

  45. But ’twas no sooner thought and done,
  The field was in a moment won.

  46. “Make way for Liberty!” he cried;
  Then ran with arms extended wide
  As if his dearest friend to clasp;
  Ten spears he swept within his grasp.
  “Make way for Liberty!” he cried:
  Their keen points met from side to side;
  He bowed among them like a tree,
  And thus made way for Liberty!

  47. Swift to the breach his comrades fly;
  “Make way for Liberty!” they cry.
  And through the Austrian phalanx dart,
  As rushed the spears through Arnold’s heart!
  While instantaneous as his fall,
  Rout, ruin, panic, scattered all
  An earthquake could not overthrow
  A city with a surer blow.

  48. Thus Switzerland again was free,
  Thus death made way for Liberty!
49. In the next fifty years the Swiss were engaged in a war with
Austria and another with France, and in both cases they were
victorious. But, while they were exhausted by the incessant wars that
had been urged upon them, they were threatened with a more formidable
invasion than ever. Charles the Bold, Duke of Burgundy, resolved to
attach Switzerland to his domain. Crossing the Jura, the duke found
himself in possession of Yverdun, it having been betrayed into his
hands; but the citadel still held out. Charles, irritated that his
progress should be stayed by such a handful of men, offered to let
them retire home if they would surrender, but if they still held out
he would hang them all! The Swiss, knowing prolonged defense was
useless, surrendered. As they marched out of the citadel they were
seized, by order of the duke, and all murdered.
50. Aroused by these horrors, an army of twenty thousand advanced to
meet the duke at the head of three times that number. In the battle
that ensued the Burgundians were entirely defeated, and Charles
narrowly escaped with his life. Writhing under his disgrace, and
vowing revenge, the duke raised a much more numerous army, and again
invaded Switzerland.
51. He advanced by the way of the lake of Neufchatel, and paused a few
days to capture the fortress on the banks of Lake Morat. While the
siege was going on the Swiss army concentrated, and marched to meet
their foes. Thirty thousand men were to fight the battle of freedom
against one hundred thousand. It was on Saturday, June 22, 1476. The
weather was threatening, the sky overcast, and rain fell in torrents.
A vanguard was formed, commanded by John Hallwyl, who knelt and
besought a blessing from on high. While they yet prayed the sun broke
through the clouds, upon which the Swiss commander rose, sword in
hand, crying: “Up, up, Heaven smiles on our victory!” The artillery
thundered forth as he spoke, and the whole plain, from the lake to the
rocky heights, became one vast battle-field! Toward the main body of
the Burgundians the Swiss army poured down with irresistible force and
courage; and, clearing all difficulties, they reached the line of the
enemy. A fearful slaughter now ensued. The Burgundians were utterly
vanquished. The haughty duke, pale and dispirited, fled with a few
followers, and never stopped till he reached the banks of Lake Leman.
The rout was so complete that many of the Burgundians, in terror and
despair, threw themselves into the Lake of Morat, the banks of which
were strewed with the bodies of the slain.
52. The battle of Morat lives in history with the victories of
Marathon and Bannockburn. In each, freedom for the nation was secured,
and liberty for man was preserved and transmitted. As a deed, the
Swiss victory for ever freed a people from a grasping foreign tyrant;
and it is a matter of rejoicing to all who love liberty till to-day,
and, like other great events, it is the subject of national traditions.
53. According to one of these, a young native of Friburg, who had been
engaged in the battle, keenly desirous of being the first to carry
home tidings of the victory, ran the whole way–a distance of ten or
twelve miles–and with such overhaste that on his arrival at the
market-place he dropped with fatigue, and, barely able to shout that
the Swiss were victorious, immediately expired. A twig of lime-tree,
which he carried in his hand, was planted on the spot in commemoration
of this event; and till the present day are seen, in the market-place
of Friburg, the aged and propped-up remains of the venerable tree
which grew from this twig. In most of the towns of Switzerland a “tree
of Liberty” is preserved, which came from scions of the original tree
at Friburg.
Continue...

This complete electronic text of Ten Great Events in History (1887) by James Johonnot is in the public domain.
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on December 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Ten Great Events in History (Large Print Edition)By James JohonnotAt Amazon
