

Drawing of the Mayflower
From the collection of the
Cape Cod Pilgrim Memorial Association





1. India, the great peninsula stretching from the Himalayas to Cape
Comorin, is nearly half as large as Europe, and contains a population
of 150,000,000. Myth and tradition claim for this people a very great
antiquity, and there are many evidences that in arts, government, and
literature, India is at least coeval with China and Egypt, the three
constituting the most ancient civilizations of the world. While
Western Europe was still the abode of barbarians, and while even
Greece had scarcely felt the impulse which aroused her to intellectual
life, the fabrics of India had reached a marvelous degree of fineness
and beauty; and the monarchs of the West counted it a great privilege
to be clothed in the “purple and fine linen” of the Orient.
2. The early history of India seems a confused tangle of strifes and
contentions between different nations and races for the possession of
this region, inexpressibly rich in all that makes a land desirable for
the occupation of man, and of wars between local rulers striving for
dominion. In the midst of this confusion, however, there seems to be
good evidence that the early civilization made its first appearance in
the valleys of the Upper Indus; that all invasions, until recent
times, were from the fierce tribes of the table-lands to the
northwest; that the industrious people of the valleys were driven from
their homes by successive incursions of barbarians, extending through
many centuries; that each horde, becoming partially civilized, was in
turn driven forward; and that the migrations were continuous from the
north to the south. Thus it happens that at present the population of
India consists of at least thirty distinct nationalities, and that the
aboriginal possessors of the Vale of Cashmere have been driven
forward, until now they are found only upon the summits of the
Neilgherry Mountains, in the extreme southern part of the peninsula.
3. The Brahminical religion has prevailed in India from the earliest
period. The first literary productions of the people are the Vedas,
the sacred books of the Brahmins. This religion is tolerant and
inclusive. Its pantheon recognizes so many gods that each barbarous
tribe from the North found their own deity represented, so that their
crude religious notions readily merged in the more complicated system
of the people they had conquered. The great Buddhistic reform spent
its force, and, although triumphant in other lands, it left but little
impress in India where it originated. The whole people believed the
Brahminical creed and practiced the Brahminical precepts. It was a
religion that included the purest abstractions and the grossest form
of idolatry. While absorbing all other creeds, it never sought to make
converts to its own.
4. The later incursions from the northwest were essentially different
from their predecessors. The tribes of the table-lands had been
converted to the fanatical and proselyting faith of Mohammed. About
the middle of the sixteenth century, a Mongol tribe, strong and
stalwart from late successful wars, and full of the fierce zeal of
recent converts to Moslemism, appeared at the northern gate of India,
and in a short time overspread the country and established the Mogul
Empire, with its capital at Delhi. The stern conquerors never rested
until they had firmly established their authority over the whole
country.
5. The first great Sultan, Baber, had a genius for government. He was
firm and temperate in his administration, and he protected the common
people from the worst rapacity of their former rulers. Out of the
chaos of native rule he evoked something like civilized order, and he
established the Mogul Empire upon the foundation of a higher form of
justice than had ever before been practiced in the East. After a reign
of fifty years, this great monarch died in 1605, two years before the
adventurous John Smith set foot upon the territory of Virginia.
6. For another hundred years, the Mogul Emperors, descendants of
Baber, held firm possession of India, and in that time the country
reached the height of its power in wealth and influence. Temples and
palaces, in richness and beauty surpassing the most gorgeous dreams of
western-bred people, arose on every side. Arts flourished as never
before, and the commerce of India overland to the West was so great
that large cities sprung up along its track, solely supported by the
trading caravans. The gold from all the nations toward the setting sun
was drained to pay for Indian fabrics, and India became the richest
country of the world.
7. In the beginning of the eighteenth century the Mogul Empire began
to decline. Weak and effeminate monarchs occupied the throne of Baber
and Shah Jehan. The governors of great provinces, while ruling under
the name of the Mogul, became really independent, and in turn
sub-provinces revolted and set up an independent rule. From 1700 to
1750, the whole country was ablaze with civil war. Rapacious
chieftains plundered the people, the arts declined, industry of all
kinds languished, and the country upon which Nature had lavished her
richest blessings seemed to be surrendered hopelessly to oppression
and misrule.
8. During the last century of the Mogul rule, and the following half
century of anarchy, a new element entered into the affairs of India,
which was destined to effect great and revolutionary changes.
Following the wake of Vasco da Gama, the maritime powers of Western
Europe all entered into a trade with India by the way of the Cape of
Good Hope. The long caravan route through Central Asia was abandoned,
and ships of the sea took the place of ships of the desert. Lisbon,
Amsterdam, and London absorbed the trade which had made Bagdad,
Aleppo, and Bassorah opulent, and these renowned cities of Haroun
al-Rashid speedily declined in wealth, power, and influence. The
Portuguese, Dutch, French, and English entered into eager competition
to secure the trade of India by the new route, and, to facilitate
commercial operations, stations called factories were established
along the coast. By the consent of the native princes, these factories
and a small territory adjacent were under the exclusive civil control
of the people occupying them.
9. For a hundred and fifty years these factories remained mere trading
stations, taking no part in the general political affairs of the
country. While trade was active, and the profits great, the East India
Companies who controlled the factories were content; and, while the
annual tribute or rent was paid with regularity, the native princes
had a strong motive for protecting the trading companies in their
operations. But the display of barbaric splendor excited the cupidity
of many of the agents of the companies, and the atrocities of barbaric
tyranny aroused the indignation of others, and there came a time when
interference in native affairs seemed both natural and proper.
10. The time of the new departure in policy was about the middle of
the eighteenth century; the place, the southeast coast; and the
occasion, the civil wars which grew out of disputed succession. The
student of history finds it difficult to understand fully the
political situation at the time. One of the most powerful of all the
provinces of the Mogul Empire was “The Deccan,” which extended its
sway over all of Southern India. The ruler, known as the “Nizam,"
administered the government in the name of the Mogul, but in reality
he was independent, and a true Eastern despot. The chief province of
the Deccan was “The Carnatic,” which embraced all the territory along
the eastern coast. The sovereign of this region, called the “Nabob,"
while paying a nominal tribute to the Nizam, was really independent,
raising revenue, waging wars, and forming alliances without reference
to either the government of the Deccan or that of the Mogul Empire.
11. To add to the general confusion, bands of Mahrattas, in numbers
forming large armies, were constantly roaming through the country, and
levying contributions on both the governments and the people. This
peculiar race was at first a mere band of robbers, which descended
from the western mountains of India, but by repeated conquests, and by
accessions from the wild and turbulent classes of all parts of the
country, they bad become a great power, and ruled in many fertile
provinces. “In becoming sovereigns, they did not cease to be
freebooters. Every region which was not subject to their rule was
wasted by their incursions. Whenever their kettle-drums were heard,
the peasant threw his bag of rice on his shoulder, hid his small
savings in his girdle, and fled with his wife and children to the
mountains or the jungles, to the milder neighborhood of the hyena and
the tiger.”
12. At this time the two principal factories on the east coast of
India were the British station at Fort St. George, now Madras, and the
French station at Pondicherry, eighty miles farther south. The first
man who seems to have entertained definite notions about building up a
European sovereignty upon the ruins of the Mogul Empire was Dupleix,
the French Governor at Pondicherry. His long residence in the East had
given him a knowledge of Indian affairs that few Europeans possessed.
“His restless, capacious, and inventive mind,” says Macaulay, “had
formed this scheme at a time when the oldest servants of the English
Company were busied only about invoices and bills of lading. Nor had
he only proposed for himself the end. He had also a just and distinct
view of the means by which it was to be attained.
13. “He clearly saw that the greatest force which the princes of India
could bring into the field would be no match for the small body of men
trained in the discipline and guided by the tactics of the West. He
saw, also, that the natives of India might, under European commanders,
be formed into armies such as Saxe or Frederick would be proud to
command. He was perfectly aware that the most easy and convenient way
in which a European adventurer could exercise sovereignty in India was
to govern the motions, and speak through the mouth, of some glittering
puppet dignified by the title of Nabob or Nizam. The arts, both of war
and policy, which a few years later were employed with such signal
success by the English, were first understood and practiced by this
ingenious and aspiring Frenchman.”
14. In 1748 the Nizam of the Deccan died. Two claimants for the throne
appeared in the persons of Nazir Jung, son of the old Nizam, and
Mirzapha Jung, a grandson. About the same time an adventurer, Chunda
Sahib, set up a claim for the throne of the Carnatic against Anaverdy
Khan, the reigning prince. Here was the opportunity for Dupleix to
carry his long-cherished plans into execution. He espoused the cause
of Chunda Sahib in the Carnatic, and sent four hundred French soldiers
to his assistance. A battle was fought and Anaverdy Khan was killed.
His son Mohammed Ali fled with a scanty remnant of his army to
Trichinopoly, and nearly all the Carnatic submitted to the conqueror.
15. Next Dupleix lent his French soldiers to Mirzapha Jung, who in a
short time became master of the Deccan. The new sovereigns showered
wealth and favors upon the successful Frenchman. He was declared
governor of a territory in India as large as all France, with a
population of 50,000,000 people. He was placed in command of the
largest military force of the country. He was presented with a million
dollars in money and many valuable jewels. Neither the Nizam nor the
Nabob concluded any affairs of moment without his advice and consent.
He was, in fact, invested with sovereign powers, and French influence
in Southern India was paramount and seemingly firmly established.
16. The triumph of the French arms carried consternation to the
British factory at St. George. Unless the victorious career of Dupleix
could be stayed, not only would British influence be destroyed, but
the very existence of their trading posts would soon be at an end. At
this time the government of St. George was feeble. The military
officers in command were without experience. Everything betokened
speedy and irretrievable ruin. In this emergency the valor and genius
of an obscure English youth suddenly turned the tide of fortune.
17. Robert Clive had gone to India in the service of the company as
commissary to the soldiers stationed at Fort St. George. His duties
were those of a clerk. He was now twenty-five years old, but had had
no experience in military affairs. Like Dupleix, however, he seemed to
comprehend the political situation of the country, and when the
emergency came that called forth his powers, he was found to possess
both military genius and profound statesmanship. He represented to the
officers of the post that if Trichinopoly, now besieged by Chunda
Sahib and his French allies, should surrender, Mohammed Ali would
perish, and French influence would become supreme. As the distance of
Trichinopoly from Fort St. George was so great as to preclude the
possibility of marching directly to the assistance of their ally, he
advocated the bold project of making a diversion by a sudden attack
upon Arcot, the capital of the Carnatic, and the favorite residence of
the Nabob. His plans were approved, and he was appointed commander to
carry them into execution.
18. “The young captain,” says Macaulay, “was put at the head of two
hundred English soldiers and three hundred sepoys, armed and
disciplined after the English fashion. The weather was stormy, but
Clive pushed on through thunder, lightning, and rain, to the gates of
Arcot. The garrison in a panic evacuated the fort and the English
entered it without a blow. Clive immediately began to collect
provisions, to throw up works, and make preparations for sustaining a
siege. The garrison, which had fled at his approach, had now recovered
from its dismay, and, re-enforced to the number of three thousand men,
it encamped close to the town. At dead of night Clive marched out of
the fort, attacked the camp by surprise, slew great numbers, dispersed
the rest, and returned to his quarters without having lost a single
man.
19. “The news of the fall of Arcot soon reached Chunda Sahib, as he
was besieging Trichinopoly. An army under the command of his son Rajah
Sahib, numbering ten thousand native troops and one hundred and fifty
Frenchmen, was immediately dispatched to Arcot, and proceeded to
invest the fort, which seemed quite incapable of sustaining a siege.
The walls were ruinous and the ditches dry. The garrison, reduced by
casualties, now consisted of one hundred and fifty English soldiers
and two hundred sepoys. The stock of provisions was scanty, and the
commander was a youth of five and twenty, who had been bred a
book-keeper.
20. “During fifty days the siege went on. During fifty days the young
captain maintained the defense with a firmness, vigilance, and ability
which would have done honor to the oldest marshal in Europe. The
garrison began to feel the pressure of hunger. At this juncture the
sepoys came to Clive, not to complain of their scanty fare, but to
propose that all the grain should be given to the Europeans, who
required more nourishment than the natives of Asia. The thin gruel,
they said, which was strained away from the rice, would suffice for
themselves. The devotion of Clive’s little band equaled that of the
Tenth Legion of Caesar, or of the Old Guard of Napoleon.
21. “Clive looked for succor from two sources. An attempt made by the
government at Madras to relieve the place failed, but there was still
hope from another quarter. A body of six thousand Mahrattas, under a
chief named Morari Row, had been hired to assist Mohammed Ali; but as
the French power seemed irresistible, this force bad hitherto remained
inactive on the frontiers of the Carnatic. The fame of the defense of
Arcot roused them from their torpor. Rajah Sahib learned that the
Mahrattas were in motion. It was necessary for him to be expeditious.
He first offered large bribes to Clive, and vowed that if his
proposals were not accepted he would instantly storm the fort and put
every man to the sword. Clive told him in reply that his father was a
usurper and that his army was a rabble, and that he would do well to
think twice before he sent such poltroons into a breach defended by
English soldiers.
22. “Rajah Sahib determined to storm the fort. The day was well suited
to a bold military enterprise. It was the great Mohammedan festival
which is sacred to the memory of Hosein the son of Ali. The history of
Islam contains nothing more touching than the event which gave rise to
that solemnity. The mournful legend relates how the chief of the
Fatimites, when all his brave followers had perished round him, drank
his last draught of water and uttered his latest prayer; how the
assassins carried his head in triumph, smote the lifeless lips with
his staff, and how a few old men recollected with tears that they had
seen those lips pressed to the lips of the prophet of God.
23. “After the lapse of near twelve centuries, the recurrence of this
solemn season excites the fiercest and saddest emotions in the bosoms
of the devout Moslems of India. They work themselves up to such
agonies of rage and lamentation that some, it is said, have given up
the ghost from the mere effect of mental excitement. They believe that
whoever, during this festival, falls in arms against the infidels,
atones by his death for all the sins of life, and passes at once to
the Garden of the Houris. It was at this time that Rajah Sahib
determined to assault Arcot. Stimulating drugs were employed to aid
the effect of religious zeal, and the besiegers, drunk with
enthusiasm, drunk with bang, rushed furiously to the attack.
24. “Clive had received secret intelligence of the design, had made
his arrangements, and, exhausted by fatigue, had thrown himself on his
bed. He was awakened by the alarm, and was instantly at his post. The
enemy advanced, driving before them elephants whose foreheads were
armed with iron plates. It was expected that the gates would yield to
the shock of these living battering-rams. But the huge beasts no
sooner felt the English musket-balls than they turned round and rushed
furiously away, trampling on the multitude which had urged them
forward. A raft was launched on the water which filled one part of the
ditch. Clive, perceiving that his gunners at that post did not
understand their business, took the management of a piece of artillery
himself, and cleared the raft in a few minutes.
25. “Where the moat was dry the assailants mounted with great
boldness; but they were received with a fire so heavy and so well
directed that it soon quelled the courage even of fanaticism and
intoxication. The rear ranks of the English kept the front ranks
supplied with a constant succession of loaded muskets, and every shot
told on the living mass below. After three desperate onsets, the
besiegers retired behind the ditch.
26. “The struggle lasted about an hour. Four hundred of the assailants
fell. The garrison lost only five or six men. The besieged passed an
anxious night, looking for a renewal of the attack. But when day broke
the enemy were no more to be seen. They had retired, leaving the
English several guns and a large quantity of ammunition.
27. “Clive immediately began offensive operations. Re-enforced by
seven hundred English troops and sepoys from Madras, and effecting a
junction with the auxiliary Mahratta force, he soon overran all the
Northern Carnatic. He gained a complete victory over Rajah Sahib’s
army of five thousand natives and three hundred Frenchmen. At this
time Major Lawrence arrived from England and assumed the command. An
expedition marched to the assistance of Mohammed Ali at Trichinopoly.
The besiegers were defeated, and Chunda Sahib was put to death by the
Mahrattas, into whose hands he fell.
28. “The English were now masters of the Carnatic, and the French
influence was broken. Steadily the English power was extended over the
Deccan and all Southern India. Dupleix struggled against his fate in
vain, no French armament came to his assistance. His company condemned
his policy and furnished him with no aid. But still he persisted,
bribed, intrigued, promised, lavished his private fortune, and
everywhere tried to raise new enemies to the government at Madras, but
all to no purpose. At length, when his last hope for empire died out,
broken in fortune and spirits, he returned to his native country to
die obscure and neglected.
29. “Clive went back to England for a brief space, but after a year or
two he returned to India as governor of Madras. His first service
after his return was to rout out a nest of pirates which had for a
long time maintained a stronghold upon the coast. He then turned his
attention to reform in the company’s business, and to strengthening
British influence with the natives in all directions. Before two
months had expired he received intelligence which called forth all the
energies of his bold and active mind.
30. “Of the large provinces into which the Mogul Empire was divided
the wealthiest was Bengal. No part of India possessed such natural
advantages, both for agriculture and commerce. The Ganges, rushing
through a hundred channels to the sea, has formed a vast plain of rich
mold which, even under the tropical sky, rivals the verdure of an
English April. The rice-fields yield an increase such as is elsewhere
unknown. Spices, sugar, vegetable oils are produced with marvelous
exuberance. The rivers afford an inexhaustible supply of fish. The
desolate islands along the sea-coast, overgrown with noxious
vegetation and swarming with deer and tigers, supply the cultivated
districts with salt. The great stream which fertilizes the soil is at
the same time the chief highway of Eastern commerce. On its banks, and
on those of its tributary waters, are the wealthiest marts, the most
splendid capitals, and the most sacred shrines of India. In numbers
its inhabitants exceed 60,000,000; a population greater than that of
England and France combined.
31. “The race by which this rich tract was peopled, enervated by a
soft climate and accustomed to peaceful employments, bore the same
relation to other Asiatics which the Asiatics generally bear to the
bold and energetic children of Europe. Whatever the Bengalee does, he
does languidly. His favorite pursuits are sedentary. He shrinks from
bodily exertion, and, though voluble in dispute and able in the war of
chicane, he seldom engages in a personal conflict, and scarcely ever
enlists as a soldier. There never, perhaps, existed a people so
thoroughly fitted by nature and by habit for a foreign yoke.
32. “The great commercial companies of Europe had long possessed
factories in Bengal. The French, the Dutch, and the English had
stations on the Hoogly, the chief branch of the Ganges. Of these the
English Fort William, on the site of the present city of Calcutta, was
nearest the sea. A church and ample warehouses rose in the vicinity, a
row of spacious houses, belonging to the chief officers of the East
India Company, lined the banks of the river, and in the neighborhood
had sprung up a large and busy native town. For the ground on which
the settlement stood, the English paid rent to the government, and
were permitted to have practical control of their own domain.
33. “The province of Bengal had long been governed by a viceroy of the
Mogul, who had become practically independent. In 1756 the sovereignty
descended to a youth under twenty years of age, who bore the name of
Surajah Dowlah. Oriental despots are perhaps the worst class of human
beings, and this unhappy boy was one of the worst specimens of his
class. His understanding was naturally feeble, and his temper
unamiable. His education had been such as would have enervated even a
vigorous intellect, and perverted even a generous disposition. He was
unreasonable, because nobody ever dared to reason with him, and
selfish, because he had never been made to feel himself dependent on
the good will of others.
34. “Early debauchery had unnerved his body and his mind. He indulged
immoderately in the use of ardent spirits, which inflamed his weak
brain almost to madness. His chosen companions were flatterers sprung
from the dregs of the people. It is said that he had arrived at the
last stage of human depravity, when cruelty becomes pleasing for its
own sake, when the sight of pain as pain is an agreeable excitement.
It had early been his amusement to torture beasts and birds, and when
he grew up he enjoyed with still greater relish the misery of his
fellow-creatures.
35. “From a child Surajah Dowlah had hated the English. It was his
whim to do so; and his whims were never opposed. He had formed a very
exaggerated notion of the wealth which might be obtained by plundering
them, and his feeble mind could not perceive that the riches of
Calcutta, however great, could not compensate him for what he must
lose if the European trade should be driven by his violence to some
other quarter. Pretexts for a quarrel were readily found, and Surajah
Dowlah marched with a great army against Fort William.
36. “The servants of the company at Madras had been forced to become
statesmen and soldiers. Those in Bengal were still mere traders, and
were in no condition to defend themselves against the formidable
attack. The fort was taken, after a feeble resistance, and nearly the
whole English population fell into the hands of the conqueror. A few,
including the governor, had saved themselves by taking refuge in the
ships. The Nabob seated himself with regal pomp in the principal ball
of the factory and ordered Mr. Holwell, the first in rank among the
prisoners, to be brought before him. His Highness talked about the
insolence of the English, and grumbled at the smallness of the
treasure he had found; but he promised to spare their lives, and
retired to rest.
37. “Then was committed that great crime, memorable for its singular
atrocity, memorable for the terrible retribution by which it was
followed. The English captives were left to the mercy of the guards,
and the guards determined to secure them for the night in the prison
of the garrison, a chamber known by the fearful name of the Black
Hole. The space was only twenty feet square. The air-boles were small
and obstructed. It was the summer solstice, the season when the fierce
heat of Bengal can scarcely be rendered tolerable to natives of
England by lofty hills and by the constant waving of fans.
38. “The number of prisoners was one hundred and forty-six, and they
were driven into the cell at the point of the sword. They cried for
mercy. They strove to burst the door. Holwell offered large bribes to
the jailers; but the answer was that nothing could be done without the
Nabob’s orders, and that the Nabob was asleep and would be angry if
anybody waked him. Then the prisoners went mad with despair, and
fought for places near the windows where they might obtain air. The
jailers in the mean time held lights at the bars and shouted with
laughter at the frantic struggles of their victims.
39. “At length the tumult died away in low gaspings and moanings. The
day broke. The Nabob had slept off his debauch, and permitted the door
to be opened. Twenty-three ghastly figures staggered out of the
charnel-house, one hundred and twenty-three bodies were hastily thrown
into a pit and covered up, and the Black Hole of Calcutta has gone
into history as a synonym for all that is dreadful and all that is
possible in human suffering.
40. “The horror which daylight revealed awakened neither pity nor
remorse in the bosom of the savage Nabob. He inflicted no punishment
on the murderers. He shoved no tenderness to the survivors. He sent
letters to the Court of Delhi, describing his conquest in most pompous
language. He placed a garrison at Fort William, and forbade Englishmen
to dwell in the neighborhood.
41. “In August the news of the fall of Calcutta reached Madras, and
excited the fiercest and bitterest resentment. The cry of the whole
settlement was for vengeance. Within forty-eight hours after the
arrival of the intelligence it was determined that an expedition
should be sent to the Hoogly, and that Clive should be at the head of
the land forces. The naval armament was under the command of Admiral
Watson. Nine hundred English infantry and fifteen hundred Sepoys
sailed to punish a prince who ruled over 60,000,000 of people. In
October the expedition sailed; but it had to make its way against
adverse winds, and did not reach Bengal until December.
42. “In the mean time the Surajah Dowlah was reveling in fancied
security. He was so ignorant of the state of foreign countries that he
often used to say that there were not ten thousand men in all Europe,
and it never occurred to him that it was possible that the English
would dare to invade his dominions. But while in no fear of the
English, he began to miss them greatly. His revenues fell off, and his
ministers at length made him understand that it was more profitable to
protect traders than to plunder them. He was disposed to permit the
company to resume their operations when he heard of the arrival of
Clive in the Hoogly. He instantly marched with his troops toward
Calcutta.
43. “Clive commenced operations with his usual vigor. He routed the
garrison at Fort William, recovered Calcutta, and stormed and sacked
the Nabob’s stations along the river. The Nabob, alarmed at this proof
of power and spirit, made overtures of peace. He offered to restore
the factory, and to give compensation to those whom he had despoiled.
44. “Clive, considering the disparity of his force and the uncertainty
of war, consented to negotiate. The terms which he demanded were those
which guaranteed much greater power to the English than they ever had
before. His manner was cool and determined, as though conscious of
possessing power sufficient to enforce his demands. The Nabob behaved
with all the faithlessness of an Indian statesman and with all the
levity of a boy. He promised, retracted, hesitated, evaded. At one
time he advanced with his army in a threatening manner toward
Calcutta, but when he saw the resolute front which the English
presented, be fell back in alarm, and consented to make peace on their
own terms.
45. “The treaty was no sooner concluded than he formed new designs
against them. He intrigued with the French upon the Hoogly. He invited
the French force in the Deccan to come and drive the English out of
Bengal. All this was well known to Clive and Watson. They resolved to
rid themselves of one source of danger before the Nabob’s plans were
consummated. They attacked the French factory upon the Hoogly. Watson
directed the expedition by water, and Clive by land. Their success was
rapid and complete. The fort, the garrison, the artillery, the
military stores, all fell into the hands of the English. Fresh from
this victory Clive returned to his negotiations with the Surajah
Dowlah.
46. “The Nabob was confounded by this sudden movement and the
destruction of the French power. He regarded the English with still
greater fear and still greater hatred. He oscillated between servility
and insolence. One day he sent a large sum to Calcutta, as part of the
compensation due for the wrongs he had committed. The nest day he sent
valuable jewels to Bussy, the French commander in the Deccan,
imploring that officer to hasten and protect Bengal against Clive,
whom ’may all bad fortune attend.’ He ordered his army to march
against the English. He countermanded his orders. He tore Clive’s
letters. He sent answers in the most florid language of compliment. He
threatened to impale Mr. Watts, the English agent. He sent for Mr.
Watts and begged pardon for the insult.
47. “In the mean time his folly, his vices, his dissolute manners, and
his love of low company disgusted all classes of his own subjects, and
a formidable conspiracy was formed against him in his own capital. The
conspirators entered into negotiation with Clive, and he agreed to
place Meer Jaffler, the head of the movement, upon the throne of
Bengal. In his diplomacy Clive seems to have laid aside his character
as a bluff soldier, and to have taken lessons from his wily and
treacherous Indian foes. He intrigued and deceived until the last
moment, when the conspiracy was ripe and his army ready.
48. “The moment for action came. Mr. Watts, the English agent,
secretly fled and took refuge in Calcutta. Clive put his troops in
motion, and wrote to the Nabob a letter in which he set forth the
English wrongs, and concluded by saying that, as the rains were about
to set in, he and his men would do themselves the honor of waiting
upon his Highness for an answer.
49. “Surajah Dowlah instantly assembled his whole force and marched to
encounter the English. It had been arranged that Meer Jaffier should
separate himself from the Nabob, and carry over his division to Clive.
But as the decisive moment approached, the fears of the conspirator
overcame his ambition. Clive advanced to the river which separated him
from his foe. The Nabob lay with a mighty power a few miles off at
Plassey. Meer Jaffier delayed, and returned evasive answers to the
remonstrances of the English general.
50. “Clive was in an anxious and painful situation. He could place no
confidence in the sincerity or the courage of his confederate; and
whatever confidence he might have in his own military talents, and in
the valor and discipline of his troops, it was no light thing to
engage an army twenty times as numerous as his own. Before him lay a
river over which it was easy to advance, but over which, if things
went ill, not one of his little band would return.
51. “On this occasion, for the first and for the last time, his
dauntless spirit, during a few hours, shrank from the fearful
responsibility of making a decision. He called a council of war. The
majority pronounced against fighting, and Clive declared his
concurrence with the majority. Long afterward he said that he had
never called but one council of war, and that if he had taken their
advice the British would never have been masters of Bengal. But
scarcely had the meeting broke up than he was himself again. He
retired alone under the shade of some trees, and passed an hour there
in thought. He came back determined to take the risk, and gave orders
that all should be in readiness for passing the river on the morrow.
52. “The river was passed; and, at the close of a toilsome day’s
march, the army, long after sunset, took up its quarters in a grove of
mango-trees near Plassey, within a mile of the enemy. Clive was unable
to steep; he heard through the night the sound of drums and cymbals
from the vast camp of the Nabob. It is not strange that even his stout
heart should now and then have sunk, when he reflected against what
odds, and for what a prize, he was in a few hours to contend.
53. “Nor was the rest of Surajah Dowlah more peaceful. His mind, at
once weak and stormy, was distracted by wild and horrible
apprehensions. Appalled by the greatness and nearness of the crisis,
distrusting his captains, dreading every one who approached him,
dreading to be left alone, lie sat gloomily in his tent, haunted, a
Greek poet would have said, by the Furies of those who had cursed him
with their last breath in the Black Hole.
54. “The day broke–the day which was to decide the fate of India. At
sunrise the army of the Nabob, pouring through many openings of the
camp, began to move toward the grove where the English lay. Forty
thousand infantry, armed with firelocks, pikes, swords, bows and
arrows, covered the plain. They were accompanied by fifty pieces of
ordnance of the largest size, each tugged by a long team of white
oxen, and each pushed on from behind by an elephant. Some smaller
guns, under the direction of French soldiers, were perhaps more
formidable.
55. “The cavalry were fifteen thousand, drawn from the bolder races
which inhabit the northern provinces; and the practiced eye of Clive
could perceive that the men and horses were more powerful than those
of the Carnatic. The force opposed to this great multitude consisted
of only three thousand men; but of these, nearly one thousand were
English, and all were led by English officers and trained in the
English discipline.
56. “The battle commenced with a cannonade, in which the artillery of
the Nabob did scarcely any execution, while the field-pieces of the
English produced great effect. Several officers in Surajah Dowlah’s
service fell. Disorder began to spread through his ranks. His own
terror increased every moment. One of the conspirators advised him to
retreat. This advice, agreeing as it did with what his own terrors
suggested, was readily received. He ordered his army to fall back, and
this order decided his fate. Clive snatched the moment, and ordered
his troops to advance.
57. “The confused and dispirited multitude gave way before the onset
of disciplined valor. No mob attacked by regular soldiers was ever
more completely routed. The little band of Frenchmen, who alone
ventured to confront the English, were swept down the stream of the
fugitives. In an hour the forces of Surajah Dowlah were dispersed,
never to re-assemble. Only five hundred of the vanquished were slain;
but their camp, their guns, their baggage, innumerable wagons,
innumerable cattle, remained in the power of the conqueror. With a
loss of twenty-two soldiers killed and fifty wounded, Clive had
scattered an army of sixty thousand men, and had subdued an empire
larger and more populous than Great Britain.”
58. This brilliant success of Clive added Plassey as one of the
battle-fields of the world which has shaped national destinies and
decided the fate of trillions of people. Though much was yet to be
done before the fruits of victory could be fully realized, Clive at
once became almost supreme in authority. Surajah Dowlah fled in
disguise, and disappeared from history in complete obscurity. Meer
Jaffler held Clive in slavish awe. He once reproved a native of high
rank for some trouble with the company’s Sepoys. “Are you yet to
learn,” he said, “who Colonel Clive is, and in what station God has
placed him?” The answer was: “I affront the colonel! I who never get
up in the morning without making three low bows to his jackass!”
59. The policy inaugurated by Clive was continued by his successors.
The British rule was extended by setting up native princes, or setting
them aside, as expediency dictated, until the whole vast region south
of the Himalayas passed under their control. The weak trading
companies of 1755 have blossomed out into an empire.
60. British India to-day, in extent of territory and in absolute
safety, is immeasurably greater than that of the Moguls in the height
of their glory. The first wild exercise of irresponsible power has
been corrected, and governmental affairs under British rule are now
administered on the foundation of substantial justice. The peasant no
longer flies from governmental officers to the more merciful
companionship of the cobra and tiger, and all who toil find protection
as never before. The races of the Orient have been brought face to
face with the arts and sciences of the West, and untold millions have
cause to bless the day when Robert Clive was forced to close the
ledger and take up the sword.
Continue...

This complete electronic text of Ten Great Events in History (1887) by James Johonnot is in the public domain.
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on December 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
Ten Great Events in History (Large Print Edition)By James JohonnotAt Amazon
