




It is with no small amount of trepidation that I take my place
behind this desk, and face this learned audience.  To us
Americans, the experience of receiving instruction from the
living voice, as well as from the books, of European scholars, is
very familiar.  At my own University of Harvard, not a winter
passes without its harvest, large or small, of lectures from
Scottish, English, French, or German representatives of the
science or literature of their respective countries whom we have
either induced to cross the ocean to address us, or captured on
the wing as they were visiting our land.  It seems the natural
thing for us to listen whilst the Europeans talk.  The contrary
habit, of talking whilst the Europeans listen, we have not yet
acquired; and in him who first makes the adventure it begets a
certain sense of apology being due for so presumptuous an act. 
Particularly must this be the case on a soil as sacred to the
American imagination as that of Edinburgh.  The glories of the
philosophic chair of this university were deeply impressed on my
imagination in boyhood.  Professor Fraser’s Essays in Philosophy,
then just published, was the first philosophic book I ever looked
into, and I well remember the awestruck feeling I received from
the account of Sir William Hamilton’s classroom therein
contained.  Hamilton’s own lectures were the first philosophic
writings I ever forced myself to study, and after that I was
immersed in Dugald Stewart and Thomas Brown.  Such juvenile
emotions of reverence never get outgrown; and I confess that to
find my humble self promoted from my native wilderness to be
actually for the time an official here, and transmuted into a
colleague of these illustrious names, carries with it a sense of
dreamland quite as much as of reality.
But since I have received the honor of this appointment I have
felt that it would never do to decline.  The academic career also
has its heroic obligations, so I stand here without further
deprecatory words.  Let me say only this, that now that the
current, here and at Aberdeen, has begun to run from west to
east, I hope it may continue to do so.  As the years go by, I
hope that many of my countrymen may be asked to lecture in the
Scottish universities, changing places with Scotsmen lecturing in
the United States; I hope that our people may become in all these
higher matters even as one people; and that the peculiar
philosophic temperament, as well as the peculiar political
temperament, that goes with our English speech may more and more
pervade and influence the world.
As regards the manner in which I shall have to administer this
lectureship, I am neither a theologian, nor a scholar learned in
the history of religions, nor an anthropologist.  Psychology is
the only branch of learning in which I am particularly versed. 
To the psychologist the religious propensities of man must be at
least as interesting as any other of the facts pertaining to his
mental constitution.  It would seem, therefore, that, as a
psychologist, the natural thing for me would be to invite you to
a descriptive survey of those religious propensities.
If the inquiry be psychological, not religious institutions, but
rather religious feelings and religious impulses must be its
subject, and I must confine myself to those more developed
subjective phenomena recorded in literature produced by
articulate and fully self-conscious men, in works of piety and
autobiography.  Interesting as the origins and early stages of a
subject always are, yet when one seeks earnestly for its full
significance, one must always look to its more completely evolved
and perfect forms.  It follows from this that the documents that
will most concern us will be those of the men who were most
accomplished in the religious life and best able to give an
intelligible account of their ideas and motives.  These men, of
course, are either comparatively modern writers, or else such
earlier ones as have become religious classics.  The documents
humains which we shall find most instructive need not then be
sought for in the haunts of special erudition–they lie along the
beaten highway; and this circumstance, which flows so naturally
from the character of our problem, suits admirably also your
lecturer’s lack of special theological learning. I may take
my citations, my sentences and paragraphs of personal confession,
from books that most of you at some time will have had already in
your hands, and yet this will be no detriment to the value of my
conclusions.  It is true that some more adventurous reader and
investigator, lecturing here in future, may unearth from the
shelves of libraries documents that will make a more delectable
and curious entertainment to listen to than mine.  Yet I doubt
whether he will necessarily, by his control of so much more
out-of-the-way material, get much closer to the essence of the
matter in hand.
The question, What are the religious propensities?  and the
question, What is their philosophic significance?  are two
entirely different orders of question from the logical point of
view; and, as a failure to recognize this fact distinctly may
breed confusion, I wish to insist upon the point a little before
we enter into the documents and materials to which I have
referred.
In recent books on logic, distinction is made between two orders
of inquiry concerning anything.  First, what is the nature of it?
how did it come about?  what is its constitution, origin, and
history?  And second, What is its importance, meaning, or
significance, now that it is once here? The answer to the one
question is given in an existential judgment or proposition.  The
answer to the other is a proposition of value, what the Germans
call a Werthurtheil, or what we may, if we like, denominate a
spiritual judgment.  Neither judgment can be deduced immediately
from the other.  They proceed from diverse intellectual
preoccupations, and the mind combines them only by making them
first separately, and then adding them together.
In the matter of religions it is particularly easy to distinguish
the two orders of question.  Every religious phenomenon has its
history and its derivation from natural antecedents.  What is
nowadays called the higher criticism of the Bible is only a study
of the Bible from this existential point of view, neglected too
much by the earlier church.  Under just what biographic
conditions did the sacred writers bring forth their various
contributions to the holy volume?  And what had they exactly in
their several individual minds, when they delivered their
utterances?  These are manifestly questions of historical fact,
and one does not see how the answer to them can decide offhand
the still further question: of what use should such a volume,
with its manner of coming into existence so defined, be to us as
a guide to life and a revelation?  To answer this other question
we must have already in our mind some sort of a general theory as
to what the peculiarities in a thing should be which give it
value for purposes of revelation; and this theory itself would be
what I just called a spiritual judgment.  Combining it with our
existential judgment, we might indeed deduce another spiritual
judgment as to the Bible’s worth.  Thus if our theory of
revelation-value were to affirm that any book, to possess it,
must have been composed automatically or not by the free caprice
of the writer, or that it must exhibit no scientific and historic
errors and express no local or personal passions, the Bible would
probably fare ill at our hands.  But if, on the other hand, our
theory should allow that a book may well be a revelation in spite
of errors and passions and deliberate human composition, if only
it be a true record of the inner experiences of great-souled
persons wrestling with the crises of their fate, then the verdict
would be much more favorable.  You see that the existential facts
by themselves are insufficient for determining the value; and the
best adepts of the higher criticism accordingly never confound
the existential with the spiritual problem.  With the same
conclusions of fact before them, some take one view, and some
another, of the Bible’s value as a revelation, according as their
spiritual judgment as to the foundation of values differs.
I make these general remarks about the two sorts of judgment,
because there are many religious persons–some of you now
present, possibly, are among them–who do not yet make a working
use of the distinction, and who may therefore feel first a little
startled at the purely existential point of view from which in
the following lectures the phenomena of religious experience must
be considered.  When I handle them biologically and
psychologically as if they were mere curious facts of individual
history, some of you may think it a degradation of so sublime a
subject, and may even suspect me, until my purpose gets more
fully expressed, of deliberately seeking to discredit the
religious side of life.
Such a result is of course absolutely alien to my intention; and
since such a prejudice on your part would seriously obstruct the
due effect of much of what I have to relate, I will devote a few
more words to the point.
There can be no doubt that as a matter of fact a religious life,
exclusively pursued, does tend to make the person exceptional and
eccentric.  I speak not now of your ordinary religious believer,
who follows the conventional observances of his country, whether
it be Buddhist, Christian, or Mohammedan.  His religion has been
made for him by others, communicated to him by tradition,
determined to fixed forms by imitation, and retained by habit. 
It would profit us little to study this second-hand religious
life.  We must make search rather for the original experiences
which were the pattern-setters to all this mass of suggested
feeling and imitated conduct.  These experiences we can only find
in individuals for whom religion exists not as a dull habit, but
as an acute fever rather.  But such individuals are “geniuses” in
the religious line; and like many other geniuses who have brought
forth fruits effective enough for commemoration in the pages of
biography, such religious geniuses have often shown symptoms of
nervous instability.  Even more perhaps than other kinds of
genius, religious leaders have been subject to abnormal psychical
visitations.  Invariably they have been creatures of exalted
emotional sensibility.  Often they have led a discordant inner
life, and had melancholy during a part of their career.  They
have known no measure, been liable to obsessions and fixed ideas;
and frequently they have fallen into trances, heard voices, seen
visions, and presented all sorts of peculiarities which are
ordinarily classed as pathological.  Often, moreover, these
pathological features in their career have helped to give them
their religious authority and influence.
If you ask for a concrete example, there can be no better one
than is furnished by the person of George Fox.  The Quaker
religion which he founded is something which it is impossible to
overpraise.  In a day of shams, it was a religion of veracity
rooted in spiritual inwardness, and a return to something more
like the original gospel truth than men had ever known in
England.  So far as our Christian sects today are evolving into
liberality, they are simply reverting in essence to the position
which Fox and the early Quakers so long ago assumed.  No one can
pretend for a moment that in point of spiritual sagacity and
capacity, Fox’s mind was unsound.  Everyone who confronted him
personally, from Oliver Cromwell down to county magistrates and
jailers, seems to have acknowledged his superior power.  Yet from
the point of view of his nervous constitution, Fox was a
psychopath or detraque of the deepest dye.  His Journal abounds
in entries of this sort:–
“As I was walking with several friends, I lifted up my head and
saw three steeple-house spires, and they struck at my life.  I
asked them what place that was?  They said, Lichfield. 
Immediately the word of the Lord came to me, that I must go
thither.  Being come to the house we were going to, I wished the
friends to walk into the house, saying nothing to them of whither
I was to go.  As soon as they were gone I stept away, and went by
my eye over hedge and ditch till I came within a mile of
Lichfield where, in a great field, shepherds were keeping their
sheep.  Then was I commanded by the Lord to pull off my shoes.  I
stood still, for it was winter: but the word of the Lord was like
a fire in me.  So I put off my shoes and left them with the
shepherds; and the poor shepherds trembled, and were astonished.
Then I walked on about a mile, and as soon as I was got within
the city, the word of the Lord came to me again, saying: Cry, ’Wo
to the bloody city of Lichfield!’ So I went up and down the
streets, crying with a loud voice, Wo to the bloody city of
Lichfield!  It being market day, I went into the market-place,
and to and fro in the several parts of it, and made stands,
crying as before, Wo to the bloody city of Lichfield!  And no one
laid hands on me.  As I went thus crying through the streets,
there seemed to me to be a channel of blood running down the
streets, and the market-place appeared like a pool of blood. When
I had declared what was upon me, and felt myself clear, I went
out of the town in peace; and returning to the shepherds gave
them some money, and took my shoes of them again.  But the fire
of the Lord was so on my feet, and all over me, that I did not
matter to put on my shoes again, and was at a stand whether I
should or no, till I felt freedom from the Lord so to do: then,
after I had washed my feet, I put on my shoes again. After this a
deep consideration came upon me, for what reason I should be sent
to cry against that city, and call it The bloody city!  For
though the parliament had the minister one while, and the king
another, and much blood had been shed in the town during the wars
between them, yet there was no more than had befallen many other
places.  But afterwards I came to understand, that in the Emperor
Diocletian’s time a thousand Christians were martyr’d in
Lichfield.  So I was to go, without my shoes, through the
channel of their blood, and into the pool of their blood in the
market-place, that I might raise up the memorial of the blood of
those martyrs, which had been shed above a thousand years before,
and lay cold in their streets.  So the sense of this blood was
upon me, and I obeyed the word of the Lord.”
Bent as we are on studying religion’s existential conditions, we
cannot possibly ignore these pathological aspects of the subject.
We must describe and name them just as if they occurred in
non-religious men.  It is true that we instinctively recoil from
seeing an object to which our emotions and affections are
committed handled by the intellect as any other object is
handled.  The first thing the intellect does with an object is to
class it along with something else.  But any object that is
infinitely important to us and awakens our devotion feels to us
also as if it must be sui generis and unique.  Probably a crab
would be filled with a sense of personal outrage if it could hear
us class it without ado or apology as a crustacean, and thus
dispose of it.  “I am no such thing, it would say; I am MYSELF,
MYSELF alone.
The next thing the intellect does is to lay bare the causes in
which the thing originates.  Spinoza says: “I will analyze the
actions and appetites of men as if it were a question of lines,
of planes, and of solids.”  And elsewhere he remarks that he
will consider our passions and their properties with the same eye
with which he looks on all other natural things, since the
consequences of our affections flow from their nature with the
same necessity as it results from the nature of a triangle that
its three angles should be equal to two right angles.  Similarly
M. Taine, in the introduction to his history of English
literature, has written: “Whether facts be moral or physical, it
makes no matter.  They always have their causes.  There are
causes for ambition, courage, veracity, just as there are for
digestion, muscular movement, animal heat.  Vice and virtue are
products like vitriol and sugar.”  When we read such
proclamations of the intellect bent on showing the existential
conditions of absolutely everything, we feel–quite apart from
our legitimate impatience at the somewhat ridiculous swagger of
the program, in view of what the authors are actually able to
perform–menaced and negated in the springs of our innermost
life.  Such cold-blooded assimilations threaten, we think, to
undo our soul’s vital secrets, as if the same breath which should
succeed in explaining their origin would simultaneously explain
away their significance, and make them appear of no more
preciousness, either, than the useful groceries of which M. Taine
speaks.
Perhaps the commonest expression of this assumption that
spiritual value is undone if lowly origin be asserted is seen in
those comments which unsentimental people so often pass on their
more sentimental acquaintances.  Alfred believes in immortality
so strongly because his temperament is so emotional.  Fanny’s
extraordinary conscientiousness is merely a matter of
overinstigated nerves.  William’s melancholy about the universe
is due to bad digestion–probably his liver is torpid.  Eliza’s
delight in her church is a symptom of her hysterical
constitution.  Peter would be less troubled about his soul if he
would take more exercise in the open air, etc.  A more fully
developed example of the same kind of reasoning is the fashion,
quite common nowadays among certain writers, of criticizing the
religious emotions by showing a connection between them and the
sexual life.  Conversion is a crisis of puberty and adolescence. 
The macerations of saints, and the devotion of missionaries, are
only instances of the parental instinct of self-sacrifice gone
astray.  For the hysterical nun, starving for natural life,
Christ is but an imaginary substitute for a more earthly object
of affection. And the like.[1]
[1]  As with many ideas that float in the air of one’s time, this
notion shrinks from dogmatic general statement and expresses
itself only partially and by innuendo.  It seems to me that few
conceptions are less instructive than this re-interpretation of
religion as perverted sexuality.  It reminds one, so crudely is
it often employed, of the famous Catholic taunt, that the
Reformation may be best understood by remembering that its fons
et origo was Luther’s wish to marry a nun:–the effects are
infinitely wider than the alleged causes, and for the most part
opposite in nature.  It is true that in the vast collection of
religious phenomena, some are undisguisedly amatory–e.g.,
sex-deities and obscene rites in polytheism, and ecstatic
feelings of union with the Savior in a few Christian mystics. 
But then why not equally call religion an aberration of the
digestive function, and prove one’s point by the worship of
Bacchus and Ceres, or by the ecstatic feelings of some other
saints about the Eucharist?  Religious language clothes itself in
such poor symbols as our life affords, and the whole organism
gives overtones of comment whenever the mind is strongly stirred
to expression.  Language drawn from eating and drinking is
probably as common in religious literature as is language drawn
from the sexual life.  We “hunger and thirst” after
righteousness; we “find the Lord a sweet savor;” we “taste and
see that he is good.”  “Spiritual milk for American babes, drawn
from the breasts of both testaments,” is a sub-title of the once
famous New England Primer, and Christian devotional literature
indeed quite floats in milk, thought of from the point of view,
not of the mother, but of the greedy babe.
Saint Francois de Sales, for instance, thus describes the “orison
of quietude”:  “In this state the soul is like a little child
still at the breast, whose mother to caress him whilst he is
still in her arms makes her milk distill into his mouth without
his even moving his lips.  So it is here. . . . Our Lord desires
that our will should be satisfied with sucking the milk which His
Majesty pours into our mouth, and that we should relish the
sweetness without even knowing that it cometh from the Lord.”   
And again:  “Consider the little infants, united and joined to
the breasts of their nursing mothers you will see that from time
to time they press themselves closer by little starts to which
the pleasure of sucking prompts them.  Even so, during its
orison, the heart united to its God oftentimes makes attempts at
closer union by movements during which it presses closer upon the
divine sweetness.”  Chemin de la Perfection, ch. xxxi.; Amour de
Dieu, vii. ch. i.
In fact, one might almost as well interpret religion as a
perversion of the respiratory function.  The Bible is full of the
language of respiratory oppression:  “Hide not thine ear at my
breathing; my groaning is not hid from thee; my heart panteth, my
strength faileth me; my bones are hot with my roaring all the
night long; as the hart panteth after the water-brooks, so my
soul panteth after thee, O my God:”  God’s Breath in Man is the
title of the chief work of our best known American mystic (Thomas
Lake Harris), and in certain non-Christian countries the
foundation of all religious discipline consists in regulation of
the inspiration and expiration.
These arguments are as good as much of the reasoning one hears in
favor of the sexual theory.  But the champions of the latter will
then say that their chief argument has no analogue elsewhere. 
The two main phenomena of religion, namely, melancholy and
conversion, they will say, are essentially phenomena of
adolescence, and therefore synchronous with the development of
sexual life.  To which the retort again is easy.  Even were the
asserted synchrony unrestrictedly true as a fact (which it is
not), it is not only the sexual life, but the entire higher
mental life which awakens during adolescence.  One might then as
well set up the thesis that the interest in mechanics, physics,
chemistry, logic, philosophy, and sociology, which springs up
during adolescent years along with that in poetry and religion,
is also a perversion of the sexual instinct:–but that would be
too absurd.  Moreover, if the argument from synchrony is to
decide, what is to be done with the fact that the religious age
par excellence would seem to be old age, when the uproar of the
sexual life is past?
The plain truth is that to interpret religion one must in the end
look at the immediate content of the religious consciousness. 
The moment one does this, one sees how wholly disconnected it is
in the main from the content of the sexual consciousness. 
Everything about the two things differs, objects, moods,
faculties concerned, and acts impelled to.  Any GENERAL
assimilation is simply impossible: what we find most often is
complete hostility and contrast.  If now the defenders of the
sex-theory say that this makes no difference to their thesis;
that without the chemical contributions which the sex-organs make
to the blood, the brain would not be nourished so as to carry on
religious activities, this final proposition may be true or not
true; but at any rate it has become profoundly uninstructive: we
can deduce no consequences from it which help us to interpret
religion’s meaning or value.  In this sense the religious life
depends just as much upon the spleen, the pancreas, and the
kidneys as on the sexual apparatus, and the whole theory has lost
its point in evaporating into a vague general assertion of the
dependence, SOMEHOW, of the mind upon the body.
We are surely all familiar in a general way with this method of
discrediting states of mind for which we have an antipathy.  We
all use it to some degree in criticizing persons whose states of
mind we regard as overstrained.  But when other people criticize
our own more exalted soul-flights by calling them ’nothing but’
expressions of our organic disposition, we feel outraged and
hurt, for we know that, whatever be our organism’s peculiarities,
our mental states have their substantive value as revelations of
the living truth; and we wish that all this medical materialism
could be made to hold its tongue.
Medical materialism seems indeed a good appellation for the too
simple-minded system of thought which we are considering. 
Medical materialism finishes up Saint Paul by calling his vision
on the road to Damascus a discharging lesion of the occipital
cortex, he being an epileptic.  It snuffs out Saint Teresa as an
hysteric, Saint Francis of Assisi as an hereditary degenerate. 
George Fox’s discontent with the shams of his age, and his pining
for spiritual veracity, it treats as a symptom of a disordered
colon.  Carlyle’s organ-tones of misery it accounts for by a
gastro-duodenal catarrh.  All such mental overtensions, it says,
are, when you come to the bottom of the matter, mere affairs of
diathesis (auto-intoxications most probably), due to the
perverted action of various glands which physiology will yet
discover.  And medical materialism then thinks that the spiritual
authority of all such personages is successfully undermined.[2]
[2]  For a first-rate example of medical-materialist reasoning,
see an article on “les varietes du Type devot,” by Dr. 
Binet-Sangle, in the Revue de l’Hypnotisme, xiv. 161.
Let us ourselves look at the matter in the largest possible way. 
Modern psychology, finding definite psycho-physical connections
to hold good, assumes as a convenient hypothesis that the
dependence of mental states upon bodily conditions must be
thoroughgoing and complete.  If we adopt the assumption, then of
course what medical materialism insists on must be true in a
general way, if not in every detail:  Saint Paul certainly had
once an epileptoid, if not an epileptic seizure; George Fox was
an hereditary degenerate; Carlyle was undoubtedly
auto-intoxicated by some organ or other, no matter which–and the
rest.  But now, I ask you, how can such an existential account of
facts of mental history decide in one way or another upon their
spiritual significance?  According to the general postulate of
psychology just referred to, there is not a single one of our
states of mind, high or low, healthy or morbid, that has not some
organic process as its condition.  Scientific theories are
organically conditioned just as much as religious emotions are;
and if we only knew the facts intimately enough, we should
doubtless see “the liver” determining the dicta of the sturdy
atheist as decisively as it does those of the Methodist under
conviction anxious about his soul.  When it alters in one way the
blood that percolates it, we get the methodist, when in another
way, we get the atheist form of mind.  So of all our raptures and
our drynesses, our longings and pantings, our questions and
beliefs.  They are equally organically founded, be they religious
or of non-religious content.
To plead the organic causation of a religious state of  mind,
then, in refutation of its claim to possess superior spiritual
value, is quite illogical and arbitrary, unless one has
already worked out in advance some psycho-physical theory
connecting spiritual values in general with determinate sorts of
physiological change.  Otherwise none of our thoughts and
feelings, not even our scientific doctrines, not even our
DIS-beliefs, could retain any value as revelations of the truth,
for every one of them without exception flows from the state of
its possessor’s body at the time.
It is needless to say that medical materialism draws in point of
fact no such sweeping skeptical conclusion.  It is sure, just as
every simple man is sure, that some states of mind are inwardly
superior to others, and reveal to us more truth, and in this it
simply makes use of an ordinary spiritual judgment.  It has no
physiological theory of the production of these its favorite
states, by which it may accredit them; and its attempt to
discredit the states which it dislikes, by vaguely associating
them with nerves and liver, and connecting them with names
connoting bodily affliction, is altogether illogical and
inconsistent.
Let us play fair in this whole matter, and be quite candid with
ourselves and with the facts.  When we think certain states of
mind superior to others, is it ever because of what we know
concerning their organic antecedents?  No! it is always for two
entirely different reasons.  It is either because we take an
immediate delight in them; or else it is because we believe them
to bring us good consequential fruits for life.  When we speak
disparagingly of “feverish fancies,” surely the fever-process as
such is not the ground of our disesteem–for aught we know to the
contrary, 103 degrees or 104 degrees Fahrenheit might be a much
more favorable temperature for truths to germinate and sprout in,
than the more ordinary blood-heat of 97 or 98 degrees.  It is
either the disagreeableness itself of the fancies, or their
inability to bear the criticisms of the convalescent hour.  When
we praise the thoughts which health brings, health’s peculiar
chemical metabolisms have nothing to do with determining our
judgment.  We know in fact almost nothing about these
metabolisms.  It is the character of inner happiness in the
thoughts which stamps them as good, or else their consistency
with our other opinions and their serviceability for our needs,
which make them pass for true in our esteem.
Now the more intrinsic and the more remote of these criteria do
not always hang together.  Inner happiness and serviceability do
not always agree.  What immediately feels most “good” is not
always most “true,” when measured by the verdict of the rest of
experience.  The difference between Philip drunk and Philip sober
is the classic instance in corroboration.  If merely “feeling
good” could decide, drunkenness would be the supremely valid
human experience.  But its revelations, however acutely
satisfying at the moment, are inserted into an environment which
refuses to bear them out for any length of time.  The consequence
of this discrepancy of the two criteria is the uncertainty which
still prevails over so many of our spiritual judgments.  There
are moments of sentimental and mystical experience–we shall
hereafter hear much of them–that carry an enormous sense of
inner authority and illumination with them when they come.  But
they come seldom, and they do not come to everyone; and the rest
of life makes either no connection with them, or tends to
contradict them more than it confirms them.  Some persons follow
more the voice of the moment in these cases, some prefer to be
guided by the average results.  Hence the sad discordancy of so
many of the spiritual judgments of human beings; a discordancy
which will be brought home to us acutely enough before these
lectures end.
It is, however, a discordancy that can never be resolved by any
merely medical test.  A good example of the impossibility of
holding strictly to the medical tests is seen in the theory of
the pathological causation of genius promulgated by recent
authors.  “Genius,” said Dr. Moreau, “is but one of the many
branches of the neuropathic tree.”  “Genius,” says Dr. Lombroso,
“is a symptom of hereditary degeneration of the epileptoid
variety, and is allied to moral insanity.”   “Whenever a man’s
life,” writes Mr. Nisbet, “is at once sufficiently illustrious
and recorded with sufficient fullness to be a subject of
profitable study, he inevitably falls into the morbid category. .
. .  And it is worthy of remark that, as a rule, the greater the
genius, the greater the unsoundness."[3]
[3]  J. F. Nisbet:  The Insanity of Genius, 3d ed., London, 1893,
pp. xvi., xxiv.
Now do these authors, after having succeeded in establishing to
their own satisfaction that the works of genius are fruits of
disease, consistently proceed thereupon to impugn the VALUE of
the fruits?  Do they deduce a new spiritual judgment from their
new doctrine of existential conditions? Do they frankly forbid us
to admire the productions of genius from now onwards?  and say
outright that no neuropath can ever be a revealer of new truth?
No! their immediate spiritual instincts are too strong for them
here, and hold their own against inferences which, in mere love
of logical consistency, medical materialism ought to be only too
glad to draw.  One disciple of the school, indeed, has striven to
impugn the value of works of genius in a wholesale way (such
works of contemporary art, namely, as he himself is unable to
enjoy, and they are many) by using medical arguments.[4]  But for
the most part the masterpieces are left unchallenged; and the
medical line of attack either confines itself to such secular
productions as everyone admits to be intrinsically eccentric, or
else addresses itself exclusively to religious manifestations. 
And then it is because the religious manifestations have been
already condemned because the critic dislikes them on internal or
spiritual grounds.
[4]  Max Nordau, in his bulky book entitled Degeneration.
In the natural sciences and industrial arts it never occurs to
anyone to try to refute opinions by showing up their author’s
neurotic constitution.  Opinions here are invariably tested by
logic and by experiment, no matter what may be their author’s
neurological type.  It should be no otherwise with religious
opinions.  Their value can only be ascertained by spiritual
judgments directly passed upon them, judgments based on our own
immediate feeling primarily; and secondarily on what we can
ascertain of their experiential relations to our moral needs and
to the rest of what we hold as true.
Immediate luminousness, in short, philosophical reasonableness,
and moral helpfulness are the only available criteria. Saint
Teresa might have had the nervous system of the placidest cow,
and it would not now save her theology, if the trial of the
theology by these other tests should show it to be contemptible. 
And conversely if her theology can stand these other tests, it
will make no difference how hysterical or nervously off her
balance Saint Teresa may have been when she was with us here
below.
You see that at bottom we are thrown back upon the general
principles by which the empirical philosophy has always contended
that we must be guided in our search for truth.  Dogmatic
philosophies have sought for tests for truth which might dispense
us from appealing to the future. Some direct mark, by noting
which we can be protected immediately and absolutely, now and
forever, against all mistake–such has been the darling dream of
philosophic dogmatists.  It is clear that the ORIGIN of the truth
would be an admirable criterion of this sort, if only the various
origins could be discriminated from one another from this 
point of view, and the history of dogmatic opinion shows that
origin has always been a favorite test.  Origin in immediate
intuition; origin in pontifical authority; origin in supernatural
revelation, as by vision, hearing, or unaccountable impression;
origin in direct possession by a higher spirit, expressing itself
in prophecy and warning; origin in automatic utterance
generally–these origins have been stock warrants for the truth
of one opinion after another which we find represented in
religious history.  The medical materialists are therefore only
so many belated dogmatists, neatly turning the tables on their
predecessors by using the criterion of origin in a destructive
instead of an accreditive way.
They are effective with their talk of pathological origin only so
long as supernatural origin is pleaded by the other side, and
nothing but the argument from origin is under discussion.  But
the argument from origin has seldom been used alone, for it is
too obviously insufficient.  Dr. Maudsley is perhaps the
cleverest of the rebutters of supernatural religion on grounds of
origin.  Yet he finds himself forced to write:–
“What right have we to believe Nature under any obligation to do
her work by means of complete minds only?  She may find an
incomplete mind a more suitable instrument for a particular
purpose.  It is the work that is done, and the quality in the
worker by which it was done, that is alone of moment; and it may
be no great matter from a cosmical standpoint, if in other
qualities of character he was singularly defective–if indeed he
were hypocrite, adulterer, eccentric, or lunatic. . . .  Home we
come again, then, to the old and last resort of certitude–namely
the common assent of mankind, or of the competent by instruction
and training among mankind."[5]
[5]  H. Maudsley:  Natural Causes and Supernatural Seemings,
1886, pp. 256, 257.
In other words, not its origin, but THE WAY IN WHICH IT WORKS ON
THE WHOLE, is Dr. Maudsley’s final test of a belief.  This is our
own empiricist criterion; and this criterion the stoutest
insisters on supernatural origin have also been forced to use in
the end.  Among the visions and messages some have always been
too patently silly, among the trances and convulsive seizures
some have been too fruitless for conduct and character, to pass
themselves off as significant, still less as divine.  In the
history of Christian mysticism the problem how to discriminate
between such messages and experiences as were really divine
miracles, and such others as the demon in his malice was able to
counterfeit, thus making the religious person twofold more the
child of hell he was before, has always been a difficult one to
solve, needing all the sagacity and experience of the best
directors of conscience.  In the end it had to come to our
empiricist criterion:  By their fruits ye shall know them, not by
their roots.  Jonathan Edwards’s Treatise on Religious Affections
is an elaborate working out of this thesis.  The ROOTS of a man’s
virtue are inaccessible to us.  No appearances whatever are
infallible proofs of grace.  Our practice is the only sure
evidence, even to ourselves, that we are genuinely Christians.
“In forming a judgment of ourselves now,” Edwards writes, we
should certainly adopt that evidence which our supreme Judge will
chiefly make use of when we come to stand before him at the last
day. . . .  There is not one grace of the Spirit of God, of the
existence of which, in any professor of religion, Christian
practice is not the most decisive evidence. . . .  The degree in
which our experience is productive of practice shows the degree
in which our experience is spiritual and divine.”
Catholic writers are equally emphatic.  The good dispositions
which a vision, or voice, or other apparent heavenly favor leave
behind them are the only marks by which we <22> may be sure they
are not possible deceptions of the tempter.  Says Saint Teresa:–
“Like imperfect sleep which, instead of giving more strength to
the head, doth but leave it the more exhausted, the result of
mere operations of the imagination is but to weaken the soul.
Instead of nourishment and energy she reaps only lassitude and
disgust:  whereas a genuine heavenly vision yields to her a
harvest of ineffable spiritual riches, and an admirable renewal
of bodily strength.  I alleged these reasons to those who so
often accused my visions of being the work of the enemy of
mankind and the sport of my imagination. . . .  I showed them the
jewels which the divine hand had left with me:–they were my
actual dispositions.  All those who knew me saw that I was
changed; my confessor bore witness to the fact; this improvement,
palpable in all respects, far from being hidden, was brilliantly
evident to all men.  As for myself, it was impossible to believe
that if the demon were its author, he could have used, in order
to lose me and lead me to hell, an expedient so contrary to his
own interests as that of uprooting my vices, and filling me with
masculine courage and other virtues instead, for I saw clearly
that a single one of these visions was enough to enrich me with
all that wealth."[6]
[6]  Autobiography, ch. xxviii.
I fear I may have made a longer excursus than was necessary, and
that fewer words would have dispelled the uneasiness which may
have arisen among some of you as I announced my pathological
programme.  At any rate you must all be ready now to judge the
religious life by its results exclusively, and I shall assume
that the bugaboo of morbid origin will scandalize your piety no
more.
Still, you may ask me, if its results are to be the ground of our
final spiritual estimate of a religious phenomenon, why threaten
us at all with so much existential study of its conditions?  Why
not simply leave pathological questions out?
To this I reply in two ways.  First, I say, irrepressible
curiosity imperiously leads one on; and I say, secondly, that it
always leads to a better understanding of a thing’s significance
to consider its exaggerations and perversions its equivalents and
substitutes and nearest relatives elsewhere.  Not that we may
thereby swamp the thing in the wholesale condemnation which we
pass on its inferior congeners, but rather that we may by
contrast ascertain the more precisely in what its merits consist,
by learning at the same time to what particular dangers of
corruption it may also be exposed.
Insane conditions have this advantage, that they isolate special
factors of the mental life, and enable us to inspect them
unmasked by their more usual surroundings.  They play the part in
mental anatomy which the scalpel and the microscope play in the
anatomy of the body.  To understand a thing rightly we need to
see it both out of its environment and in it, and to have
acquaintance with the whole range of its variations.  The study
of hallucinations has in this way been for psychologists the key
to their comprehension of normal sensation, that of illusions has
been the key to the right comprehension of perception.  Morbid
impulses and imperative conceptions, “fixed ideas,” so called,
have thrown a flood of light on the psychology of the normal
will; and obsessions and delusions have performed the same
service for that of the normal faculty of belief.
Similarly, the nature of genius has been illuminated by the
attempts, of which I already made mention, to class it with
psychopathical phenomena.  Borderland insanity, crankiness,
insane temperament, loss of mental balance, psychopathic
degeneration (to use a few of the many synonyms by which it has
been called), has certain peculiarities and liabilities which,
when combined with a superior quality of intellect in an
individual, make it more probable that he will make his mark and
affect his age, than if his temperament were less neurotic. 
There is of course no special affinity between crankiness as such
and superior intellect,[7] for most psychopaths have feeble
intellects, and superior intellects more commonly have normal
nervous systems. But the psychopathic temperament, whatever be
the intellect with which it finds itself paired, often brings
with it ardor and excitability of character.  The cranky person
has extraordinary emotional susceptibility.  He
is liable to fixed ideas and obsessions.  His conceptions tend to
pass immediately into belief and action; and when he gets a new
idea, he has no rest till he proclaims it, or in some way “works
it off.”  “What shall I think of it?” a common person says to
himself about a vexed question; but in a “cranky” mind “What must
I do about it?” is the form the question tends to take.  In the
autobiography of that high-souled woman, Mrs. Annie Besant, I
read the following passage:  “Plenty of people wish well to any
good cause, but very few care to exert themselves to help it, and
still fewer will risk anything in its support.  ’Someone ought to
do it, but why should I?’ is the ever reechoed phrase of
weak-kneed amiability. ’Someone ought to do it, so why not I?’ is
the cry of some earnest servant of man, eagerly forward springing
to face some perilous duty.  Between these two sentences lie
whole centuries of moral evolution.”  True enough! and between
these two sentences lie also the different destinies of the
ordinary sluggard and the psychopathic man.  Thus, when a
superior intellect and a psychopathic temperament coalesce–as in
the endless permutations and combinations of human faculty, they
are bound to coalesce often enough–in the same individual, we
have the best possible condition for the kind of effective genius
that gets into the <25> biographical dictionaries.  Such men do
not remain mere critics and understanders with their intellect. 
Their ideas possess them, they inflict them, for better or worse,
upon their companions or their age.  It is they who get counted
when Messrs. Lombroso, Nisbet, and others invoke statistics to
defend their paradox.
[7]  Superior intellect, as Professor Bain has admirably shown,
seems to consist in nothing so much as in a large development of
the faculty of association by similarity.
To pass now to religious phenomena, take the melancholy which, as
we shall see, constitutes an essential moment in every complete
religious evolution.  Take the happiness which achieved religious
belief confers.  Take the trancelike states of insight into truth
which all religious mystics report.[8]  These are each and all of
them special cases of kinds of human experience of much wider
scope.  Religious melancholy, whatever peculiarities it may have
qua religious, is at any rate melancholy.  Religious happiness is
happiness. Religious trance is trance.  And the moment we
renounce the absurd notion that a thing is exploded away as soon
as it is classed with others, or its origin is shown; the moment
we agree to stand by experimental results and inner quality, in
judging of values–who does not see that we are likely to
ascertain the distinctive significance of religious melancholy
and happiness, or of religious trances, far better by comparing
them as conscientiously as we can with other varieties of
melancholy, happiness, and trance, than by refusing to consider
their place in any more general series, and treating them as if
they were outside of nature’s order altogether?
I hope that the course of these lectures will confirm us in this
supposition.  As regards the psychopathic origin of so many
religious phenomena, that would not be in the least surprising or
disconcerting, even were such phenomena certified from on high to
be the most precious of human experiences.  No one organism can
possibly yield to its owner the whole body of truth.  Few of us
are not in some way infirm, or even diseased; and our very
infirmities help us unexpectedly.  In the psychopathic
temperament we have the emotionality which is the sine qua non of
moral perception; we have the intensity and tendency to emphasis
which are the essence of practical moral vigor; and we have the
love of metaphysics and mysticism which carry one’s interests
beyond the surface of the sensible world. What, then, is more
natural than that this temperament should introduce one to
regions of religious truth, to corners of the universe, which
your robust Philistine type of nervous system, forever offering
its biceps to be felt, thumping its breast, and thanking Heaven
that it hasn’t a single morbid fiber in its composition, would be
sure to hide forever from its self-satisfied possessors?
[8]  I may refer to a criticism of the insanity theory of genius
in the Psychological Review, ii. 287 (1895).
If there were such a thing as inspiration from a higher realm, it
might well be that the neurotic temperament would furnish the
chief condition of the requisite receptivity. And having said
thus much, I think that I may let the matter of religion and
neuroticism drop.
The mass of collateral phenomena, morbid or healthy, with which
the various religious phenomena must be compared in order to
understand them better, forms what in the slang of pedagogics is
termed “the apperceiving mass” by which we comprehend them.  The
only novelty that I can imagine this course of lectures to
possess lies in the breadth of the apperceiving mass.  I may
succeed in discussing religious experiences in a wider context
than has been usual in university courses.
Continue...

This electronic book of The Varieties of Religious Experience (A Study in Human Nature) by William James is in the public domain.
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on December 2003. Also see Part II of this book.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Varieties of Religious ExperienceBy William JamesAt Amazon
