Presented by
Authorama
Public Domain Books


To
E.P.G.
In Filial Gratitude and Love
This book would never have been written had I not been honored
with an appointment as Gifford Lecturer on Natural Religion at
the University of Edinburgh.  In casting about me for subjects of
the two courses of ten lectures each for which I thus became
responsible, it seemed to me that the first course might well be
a descriptive one on “Man’s Religious Appetites,” and the second
a metaphysical one on “Their Satisfaction through Philosophy.”   
But the unexpected growth of the psychological matter as I came
to write it out has resulted in the second subject being
postponed entirely, and the description of man’s religious
constitution now fills the twenty lectures.  In Lecture XX I have
suggested rather than stated my own philosophic conclusions, and
the reader who desires immediately to know them should turn to 
pages 501-509, and to the “Postscript” of the book. I hope to be
able at some later day to express them in more explicit form.
In my belief that a large acquaintance with particulars often
makes us wiser than the possession of abstract formulas, however
deep, I have loaded the lectures with concrete examples, and I
have chosen these among the extremer expressions of the religious
temperament.  To some readers I may consequently seem, before
they get beyond the middle of the book, to offer a caricature of
the subject.  Such convulsions of piety, they will say, are not
sane.  If, however, they will have the patience to read to the
end, I believe that this unfavorable impression will disappear;
for I there combine the religious impulses with other principles
of common sense which serve as correctives of exaggeration, and
allow the individual reader to draw as moderate conclusions as he
will.
My thanks for help in writing these lectures are due to Edwin D.
Starbuck, of Stanford University, who made over to me his large
collection of manuscript material; to Henry W. Rankin, of East
Northfield, a friend unseen but proved, to whom I owe precious
information; to Theodore Flournoy, of Geneva, to Canning Schiller
of Oxford, and to my colleague Benjamin Rand, for documents; to
my colleague Dickinson S. Miller, and to my friends, Thomas Wren
Ward, of New York, and Wincenty Lutoslawski, late of Cracow, for
important suggestions and advice.  Finally, to conversations with
the lamented Thomas Davidson and to the use of his books, at
Glenmore, above Keene Valley, I owe more obligations than I can
well express.      
Harvard University,
March, 1902.
It is with no small amount of trepidation that I take my place
behind this desk, and face this learned audience.  To us
Americans, the experience of receiving instruction from the
living voice, as well as from the books, of European scholars, is
very familiar.  At my own University of Harvard, not a winter
passes without its harvest, large or small, of lectures from
Scottish, English, French, or German representatives of the
science or literature of their respective countries whom we have
either induced to cross the ocean to address us, or captured on
the wing as they were visiting our land.  It seems the natural
thing for us to listen whilst the Europeans talk.  The contrary
habit, of talking whilst the Europeans listen, we have not yet
acquired; and in him who first makes the adventure it begets a
certain sense of apology being due for so presumptuous an act. 
Particularly must this be the case on a soil as sacred to the
American imagination as that of Edinburgh.  The glories of the
philosophic chair of this university were deeply impressed on my
imagination in boyhood.  Professor Fraser’s Essays in Philosophy,
then just published, was the first philosophic book I ever looked
into, and I well remember the awestruck feeling I received from
the account of Sir William Hamilton’s classroom therein
contained.  Hamilton’s own lectures were the first philosophic
writings I ever forced myself to study, and after that I was
immersed in Dugald Stewart and Thomas Brown.  Such juvenile
emotions of reverence never get outgrown; and I confess that to
find my humble self promoted from my native wilderness to be
actually for the time an official here, and transmuted into a
colleague of these illustrious names, carries with it a sense of
dreamland quite as much as of reality.
But since I have received the honor of this appointment I have
felt that it would never do to decline.  The academic career also
has its heroic obligations, so I stand here without further
deprecatory words.  Let me say only this, that now that the
current, here and at Aberdeen, has begun to run from west to
east, I hope it may continue to do so.  As the years go by, I
hope that many of my countrymen may be asked to lecture in the
Scottish universities, changing places with Scotsmen lecturing in
the United States; I hope that our people may become in all these
higher matters even as one people; and that the peculiar
philosophic temperament, as well as the peculiar political
temperament, that goes with our English speech may more and more
pervade and influence the world.
As regards the manner in which I shall have to administer this
lectureship, I am neither a theologian, nor a scholar learned in
the history of religions, nor an anthropologist.  Psychology is
the only branch of learning in which I am particularly versed. 
To the psychologist the religious propensities of man must be at
least as interesting as any other of the facts pertaining to his
mental constitution.  It would seem, therefore, that, as a
psychologist, the natural thing for me would be to invite you to
a descriptive survey of those religious propensities.
If the inquiry be psychological, not religious institutions, but
rather religious feelings and religious impulses must be its
subject, and I must confine myself to those more developed
subjective phenomena recorded in literature produced by
articulate and fully self-conscious men, in works of piety and
autobiography.  Interesting as the origins and early stages of a
subject always are, yet when one seeks earnestly for its full
significance, one must always look to its more completely evolved
and perfect forms.  It follows from this that the documents that
will most concern us will be those of the men who were most
accomplished in the religious life and best able to give an
intelligible account of their ideas and motives.  These men, of
course, are either comparatively modern writers, or else such
earlier ones as have become religious classics.  The documents
humains which we shall find most instructive need not then be
sought for in the haunts of special erudition–they lie along the
beaten highway; and this circumstance, which flows so naturally
from the character of our problem, suits admirably also your
lecturer’s lack of special theological learning. I may take
my citations, my sentences and paragraphs of personal confession,
from books that most of you at some time will have had already in
your hands, and yet this will be no detriment to the value of my
conclusions.  It is true that some more adventurous reader and
investigator, lecturing here in future, may unearth from the
shelves of libraries documents that will make a more delectable
and curious entertainment to listen to than mine.  Yet I doubt
whether he will necessarily, by his control of so much more
out-of-the-way material, get much closer to the essence of the
matter in hand.
The question, What are the religious propensities?  and the
question, What is their philosophic significance?  are two
entirely different orders of question from the logical point of
view; and, as a failure to recognize this fact distinctly may
breed confusion, I wish to insist upon the point a little before
we enter into the documents and materials to which I have
referred.
In recent books on logic, distinction is made between two orders
of inquiry concerning anything.  First, what is the nature of it?
how did it come about?  what is its constitution, origin, and
history?  And second, What is its importance, meaning, or
significance, now that it is once here? The answer to the one
question is given in an existential judgment or proposition.  The
answer to the other is a proposition of value, what the Germans
call a Werthurtheil, or what we may, if we like, denominate a
spiritual judgment.  Neither judgment can be deduced immediately
from the other.  They proceed from diverse intellectual
preoccupations, and the mind combines them only by making them
first separately, and then adding them together.
In the matter of religions it is particularly easy to distinguish
the two orders of question.  Every religious phenomenon has its
history and its derivation from natural antecedents.  What is
nowadays called the higher criticism of the Bible is only a study
of the Bible from this existential point of view, neglected too
much by the earlier church.  Under just what biographic
conditions did the sacred writers bring forth their various
contributions to the holy volume?  And what had they exactly in
their several individual minds, when they delivered their
utterances?  These are manifestly questions of historical fact,
and one does not see how the answer to them can decide offhand
the still further question: of what use should such a volume,
with its manner of coming into existence so defined, be to us as
a guide to life and a revelation?  To answer this other question
we must have already in our mind some sort of a general theory as
to what the peculiarities in a thing should be which give it
value for purposes of revelation; and this theory itself would be
what I just called a spiritual judgment.  Combining it with our
existential judgment, we might indeed deduce another spiritual
judgment as to the Bible’s worth.  Thus if our theory of
revelation-value were to affirm that any book, to possess it,
must have been composed automatically or not by the free caprice
of the writer, or that it must exhibit no scientific and historic
errors and express no local or personal passions, the Bible would
probably fare ill at our hands.  But if, on the other hand, our
theory should allow that a book may well be a revelation in spite
of errors and passions and deliberate human composition, if only
it be a true record of the inner experiences of great-souled
persons wrestling with the crises of their fate, then the verdict
would be much more favorable.  You see that the existential facts
by themselves are insufficient for determining the value; and the
best adepts of the higher criticism accordingly never confound
the existential with the spiritual problem.  With the same
conclusions of fact before them, some take one view, and some
another, of the Bible’s value as a revelation, according as their
spiritual judgment as to the foundation of values differs.
I make these general remarks about the two sorts of judgment,
because there are many religious persons–some of you now
present, possibly, are among them–who do not yet make a working
use of the distinction, and who may therefore feel first a little
startled at the purely existential point of view from which in
the following lectures the phenomena of religious experience must
be considered.  When I handle them biologically and
psychologically as if they were mere curious facts of individual
history, some of you may think it a degradation of so sublime a
subject, and may even suspect me, until my purpose gets more
fully expressed, of deliberately seeking to discredit the
religious side of life.
Such a result is of course absolutely alien to my intention; and
since such a prejudice on your part would seriously obstruct the
due effect of much of what I have to relate, I will devote a few
more words to the point.
There can be no doubt that as a matter of fact a religious life,
exclusively pursued, does tend to make the person exceptional and
eccentric.  I speak not now of your ordinary religious believer,
who follows the conventional observances of his country, whether
it be Buddhist, Christian, or Mohammedan.  His religion has been
made for him by others, communicated to him by tradition,
determined to fixed forms by imitation, and retained by habit. 
It would profit us little to study this second-hand religious
life.  We must make search rather for the original experiences
which were the pattern-setters to all this mass of suggested
feeling and imitated conduct.  These experiences we can only find
in individuals for whom religion exists not as a dull habit, but
as an acute fever rather.  But such individuals are “geniuses” in
the religious line; and like many other geniuses who have brought
forth fruits effective enough for commemoration in the pages of
biography, such religious geniuses have often shown symptoms of
nervous instability.  Even more perhaps than other kinds of
genius, religious leaders have been subject to abnormal psychical
visitations.  Invariably they have been creatures of exalted
emotional sensibility.  Often they have led a discordant inner
life, and had melancholy during a part of their career.  They
have known no measure, been liable to obsessions and fixed ideas;
and frequently they have fallen into trances, heard voices, seen
visions, and presented all sorts of peculiarities which are
ordinarily classed as pathological.  Often, moreover, these
pathological features in their career have helped to give them
their religious authority and influence.
If you ask for a concrete example, there can be no better one
than is furnished by the person of George Fox.  The Quaker
religion which he founded is something which it is impossible to
overpraise.  In a day of shams, it was a religion of veracity
rooted in spiritual inwardness, and a return to something more
like the original gospel truth than men had ever known in
England.  So far as our Christian sects today are evolving into
liberality, they are simply reverting in essence to the position
which Fox and the early Quakers so long ago assumed.  No one can
pretend for a moment that in point of spiritual sagacity and
capacity, Fox’s mind was unsound.  Everyone who confronted him
personally, from Oliver Cromwell down to county magistrates and
jailers, seems to have acknowledged his superior power.  Yet from
the point of view of his nervous constitution, Fox was a
psychopath or detraque of the deepest dye.  His Journal abounds
in entries of this sort:–
“As I was walking with several friends, I lifted up my head and
saw three steeple-house spires, and they struck at my life.  I
asked them what place that was?  They said, Lichfield. 
Immediately the word of the Lord came to me, that I must go
thither.  Being come to the house we were going to, I wished the
friends to walk into the house, saying nothing to them of whither
I was to go.  As soon as they were gone I stept away, and went by
my eye over hedge and ditch till I came within a mile of
Lichfield where, in a great field, shepherds were keeping their
sheep.  Then was I commanded by the Lord to pull off my shoes.  I
stood still, for it was winter: but the word of the Lord was like
a fire in me.  So I put off my shoes and left them with the
shepherds; and the poor shepherds trembled, and were astonished.
Then I walked on about a mile, and as soon as I was got within
the city, the word of the Lord came to me again, saying: Cry, ’Wo
to the bloody city of Lichfield!’ So I went up and down the
streets, crying with a loud voice, Wo to the bloody city of
Lichfield!  It being market day, I went into the market-place,
and to and fro in the several parts of it, and made stands,
crying as before, Wo to the bloody city of Lichfield!  And no one
laid hands on me.  As I went thus crying through the streets,
there seemed to me to be a channel of blood running down the
streets, and the market-place appeared like a pool of blood. When
I had declared what was upon me, and felt myself clear, I went
out of the town in peace; and returning to the shepherds gave
them some money, and took my shoes of them again.  But the fire
of the Lord was so on my feet, and all over me, that I did not
matter to put on my shoes again, and was at a stand whether I
should or no, till I felt freedom from the Lord so to do: then,
after I had washed my feet, I put on my shoes again. After this a
deep consideration came upon me, for what reason I should be sent
to cry against that city, and call it The bloody city!  For
though the parliament had the minister one while, and the king
another, and much blood had been shed in the town during the wars
between them, yet there was no more than had befallen many other
places.  But afterwards I came to understand, that in the Emperor
Diocletian’s time a thousand Christians were martyr’d in
Lichfield.  So I was to go, without my shoes, through the
channel of their blood, and into the pool of their blood in the
market-place, that I might raise up the memorial of the blood of
those martyrs, which had been shed above a thousand years before,
and lay cold in their streets.  So the sense of this blood was
upon me, and I obeyed the word of the Lord.”
Bent as we are on studying religion’s existential conditions, we
cannot possibly ignore these pathological aspects of the subject.
We must describe and name them just as if they occurred in
non-religious men.  It is true that we instinctively recoil from
seeing an object to which our emotions and affections are
committed handled by the intellect as any other object is
handled.  The first thing the intellect does with an object is to
class it along with something else.  But any object that is
infinitely important to us and awakens our devotion feels to us
also as if it must be sui generis and unique.  Probably a crab
would be filled with a sense of personal outrage if it could hear
us class it without ado or apology as a crustacean, and thus
dispose of it.  “I am no such thing, it would say; I am MYSELF,
MYSELF alone.
The next thing the intellect does is to lay bare the causes in
which the thing originates.  Spinoza says: “I will analyze the
actions and appetites of men as if it were a question of lines,
of planes, and of solids.”  And elsewhere he remarks that he
will consider our passions and their properties with the same eye
with which he looks on all other natural things, since the
consequences of our affections flow from their nature with the
same necessity as it results from the nature of a triangle that
its three angles should be equal to two right angles.  Similarly
M. Taine, in the introduction to his history of English
literature, has written: “Whether facts be moral or physical, it
makes no matter.  They always have their causes.  There are
causes for ambition, courage, veracity, just as there are for
digestion, muscular movement, animal heat.  Vice and virtue are
products like vitriol and sugar.”  When we read such
proclamations of the intellect bent on showing the existential
conditions of absolutely everything, we feel–quite apart from
our legitimate impatience at the somewhat ridiculous swagger of
the program, in view of what the authors are actually able to
perform–menaced and negated in the springs of our innermost
life.  Such cold-blooded assimilations threaten, we think, to
undo our soul’s vital secrets, as if the same breath which should
succeed in explaining their origin would simultaneously explain
away their significance, and make them appear of no more
preciousness, either, than the useful groceries of which M. Taine
speaks.
Perhaps the commonest expression of this assumption that
spiritual value is undone if lowly origin be asserted is seen in
those comments which unsentimental people so often pass on their
more sentimental acquaintances.  Alfred believes in immortality
so strongly because his temperament is so emotional.  Fanny’s
extraordinary conscientiousness is merely a matter of
overinstigated nerves.  William’s melancholy about the universe
is due to bad digestion–probably his liver is torpid.  Eliza’s
delight in her church is a symptom of her hysterical
constitution.  Peter would be less troubled about his soul if he
would take more exercise in the open air, etc.  A more fully
developed example of the same kind of reasoning is the fashion,
quite common nowadays among certain writers, of criticizing the
religious emotions by showing a connection between them and the
sexual life.  Conversion is a crisis of puberty and adolescence. 
The macerations of saints, and the devotion of missionaries, are
only instances of the parental instinct of self-sacrifice gone
astray.  For the hysterical nun, starving for natural life,
Christ is but an imaginary substitute for a more earthly object
of affection. And the like.[1]
[1]  As with many ideas that float in the air of one’s time, this
notion shrinks from dogmatic general statement and expresses
itself only partially and by innuendo.  It seems to me that few
conceptions are less instructive than this re-interpretation of
religion as perverted sexuality.  It reminds one, so crudely is
it often employed, of the famous Catholic taunt, that the
Reformation may be best understood by remembering that its fons
et origo was Luther’s wish to marry a nun:–the effects are
infinitely wider than the alleged causes, and for the most part
opposite in nature.  It is true that in the vast collection of
religious phenomena, some are undisguisedly amatory–e.g.,
sex-deities and obscene rites in polytheism, and ecstatic
feelings of union with the Savior in a few Christian mystics. 
But then why not equally call religion an aberration of the
digestive function, and prove one’s point by the worship of
Bacchus and Ceres, or by the ecstatic feelings of some other
saints about the Eucharist?  Religious language clothes itself in
such poor symbols as our life affords, and the whole organism
gives overtones of comment whenever the mind is strongly stirred
to expression.  Language drawn from eating and drinking is
probably as common in religious literature as is language drawn
from the sexual life.  We “hunger and thirst” after
righteousness; we “find the Lord a sweet savor;” we “taste and
see that he is good.”  “Spiritual milk for American babes, drawn
from the breasts of both testaments,” is a sub-title of the once
famous New England Primer, and Christian devotional literature
indeed quite floats in milk, thought of from the point of view,
not of the mother, but of the greedy babe.
Saint Francois de Sales, for instance, thus describes the “orison
of quietude”:  “In this state the soul is like a little child
still at the breast, whose mother to caress him whilst he is
still in her arms makes her milk distill into his mouth without
his even moving his lips.  So it is here. . . . Our Lord desires
that our will should be satisfied with sucking the milk which His
Majesty pours into our mouth, and that we should relish the
sweetness without even knowing that it cometh from the Lord.”   
And again:  “Consider the little infants, united and joined to
the breasts of their nursing mothers you will see that from time
to time they press themselves closer by little starts to which
the pleasure of sucking prompts them.  Even so, during its
orison, the heart united to its God oftentimes makes attempts at
closer union by movements during which it presses closer upon the
divine sweetness.”  Chemin de la Perfection, ch. xxxi.; Amour de
Dieu, vii. ch. i.
In fact, one might almost as well interpret religion as a
perversion of the respiratory function.  The Bible is full of the
language of respiratory oppression:  “Hide not thine ear at my
breathing; my groaning is not hid from thee; my heart panteth, my
strength faileth me; my bones are hot with my roaring all the
night long; as the hart panteth after the water-brooks, so my
soul panteth after thee, O my God:”  God’s Breath in Man is the
title of the chief work of our best known American mystic (Thomas
Lake Harris), and in certain non-Christian countries the
foundation of all religious discipline consists in regulation of
the inspiration and expiration.
These arguments are as good as much of the reasoning one hears in
favor of the sexual theory.  But the champions of the latter will
then say that their chief argument has no analogue elsewhere. 
The two main phenomena of religion, namely, melancholy and
conversion, they will say, are essentially phenomena of
adolescence, and therefore synchronous with the development of
sexual life.  To which the retort again is easy.  Even were the
asserted synchrony unrestrictedly true as a fact (which it is
not), it is not only the sexual life, but the entire higher
mental life which awakens during adolescence.  One might then as
well set up the thesis that the interest in mechanics, physics,
chemistry, logic, philosophy, and sociology, which springs up
during adolescent years along with that in poetry and religion,
is also a perversion of the sexual instinct:–but that would be
too absurd.  Moreover, if the argument from synchrony is to
decide, what is to be done with the fact that the religious age
par excellence would seem to be old age, when the uproar of the
sexual life is past?
The plain truth is that to interpret religion one must in the end
look at the immediate content of the religious consciousness. 
The moment one does this, one sees how wholly disconnected it is
in the main from the content of the sexual consciousness. 
Everything about the two things differs, objects, moods,
faculties concerned, and acts impelled to.  Any GENERAL
assimilation is simply impossible: what we find most often is
complete hostility and contrast.  If now the defenders of the
sex-theory say that this makes no difference to their thesis;
that without the chemical contributions which the sex-organs make
to the blood, the brain would not be nourished so as to carry on
religious activities, this final proposition may be true or not
true; but at any rate it has become profoundly uninstructive: we
can deduce no consequences from it which help us to interpret
religion’s meaning or value.  In this sense the religious life
depends just as much upon the spleen, the pancreas, and the
kidneys as on the sexual apparatus, and the whole theory has lost
its point in evaporating into a vague general assertion of the
dependence, SOMEHOW, of the mind upon the body.
We are surely all familiar in a general way with this method of
discrediting states of mind for which we have an antipathy.  We
all use it to some degree in criticizing persons whose states of
mind we regard as overstrained.  But when other people criticize
our own more exalted soul-flights by calling them ’nothing but’
expressions of our organic disposition, we feel outraged and
hurt, for we know that, whatever be our organism’s peculiarities,
our mental states have their substantive value as revelations of
the living truth; and we wish that all this medical materialism
could be made to hold its tongue.
Medical materialism seems indeed a good appellation for the too
simple-minded system of thought which we are considering. 
Medical materialism finishes up Saint Paul by calling his vision
on the road to Damascus a discharging lesion of the occipital
cortex, he being an epileptic.  It snuffs out Saint Teresa as an
hysteric, Saint Francis of Assisi as an hereditary degenerate. 
George Fox’s discontent with the shams of his age, and his pining
for spiritual veracity, it treats as a symptom of a disordered
colon.  Carlyle’s organ-tones of misery it accounts for by a
gastro-duodenal catarrh.  All such mental overtensions, it says,
are, when you come to the bottom of the matter, mere affairs of
diathesis (auto-intoxications most probably), due to the
perverted action of various glands which physiology will yet
discover.  And medical materialism then thinks that the spiritual
authority of all such personages is successfully undermined.[2]
[2]  For a first-rate example of medical-materialist reasoning,
see an article on “les varietes du Type devot,” by Dr. 
Binet-Sangle, in the Revue de l’Hypnotisme, xiv. 161.
Let us ourselves look at the matter in the largest possible way. 
Modern psychology, finding definite psycho-physical connections
to hold good, assumes as a convenient hypothesis that the
dependence of mental states upon bodily conditions must be
thoroughgoing and complete.  If we adopt the assumption, then of
course what medical materialism insists on must be true in a
general way, if not in every detail:  Saint Paul certainly had
once an epileptoid, if not an epileptic seizure; George Fox was
an hereditary degenerate; Carlyle was undoubtedly
auto-intoxicated by some organ or other, no matter which–and the
rest.  But now, I ask you, how can such an existential account of
facts of mental history decide in one way or another upon their
spiritual significance?  According to the general postulate of
psychology just referred to, there is not a single one of our
states of mind, high or low, healthy or morbid, that has not some
organic process as its condition.  Scientific theories are
organically conditioned just as much as religious emotions are;
and if we only knew the facts intimately enough, we should
doubtless see “the liver” determining the dicta of the sturdy
atheist as decisively as it does those of the Methodist under
conviction anxious about his soul.  When it alters in one way the
blood that percolates it, we get the methodist, when in another
way, we get the atheist form of mind.  So of all our raptures and
our drynesses, our longings and pantings, our questions and
beliefs.  They are equally organically founded, be they religious
or of non-religious content.
To plead the organic causation of a religious state of  mind,
then, in refutation of its claim to possess superior spiritual
value, is quite illogical and arbitrary, unless one has
already worked out in advance some psycho-physical theory
connecting spiritual values in general with determinate sorts of
physiological change.  Otherwise none of our thoughts and
feelings, not even our scientific doctrines, not even our
DIS-beliefs, could retain any value as revelations of the truth,
for every one of them without exception flows from the state of
its possessor’s body at the time.
It is needless to say that medical materialism draws in point of
fact no such sweeping skeptical conclusion.  It is sure, just as
every simple man is sure, that some states of mind are inwardly
superior to others, and reveal to us more truth, and in this it
simply makes use of an ordinary spiritual judgment.  It has no
physiological theory of the production of these its favorite
states, by which it may accredit them; and its attempt to
discredit the states which it dislikes, by vaguely associating
them with nerves and liver, and connecting them with names
connoting bodily affliction, is altogether illogical and
inconsistent.
Let us play fair in this whole matter, and be quite candid with
ourselves and with the facts.  When we think certain states of
mind superior to others, is it ever because of what we know
concerning their organic antecedents?  No! it is always for two
entirely different reasons.  It is either because we take an
immediate delight in them; or else it is because we believe them
to bring us good consequential fruits for life.  When we speak
disparagingly of “feverish fancies,” surely the fever-process as
such is not the ground of our disesteem–for aught we know to the
contrary, 103 degrees or 104 degrees Fahrenheit might be a much
more favorable temperature for truths to germinate and sprout in,
than the more ordinary blood-heat of 97 or 98 degrees.  It is
either the disagreeableness itself of the fancies, or their
inability to bear the criticisms of the convalescent hour.  When
we praise the thoughts which health brings, health’s peculiar
chemical metabolisms have nothing to do with determining our
judgment.  We know in fact almost nothing about these
metabolisms.  It is the character of inner happiness in the
thoughts which stamps them as good, or else their consistency
with our other opinions and their serviceability for our needs,
which make them pass for true in our esteem.
Now the more intrinsic and the more remote of these criteria do
not always hang together.  Inner happiness and serviceability do
not always agree.  What immediately feels most “good” is not
always most “true,” when measured by the verdict of the rest of
experience.  The difference between Philip drunk and Philip sober
is the classic instance in corroboration.  If merely “feeling
good” could decide, drunkenness would be the supremely valid
human experience.  But its revelations, however acutely
satisfying at the moment, are inserted into an environment which
refuses to bear them out for any length of time.  The consequence
of this discrepancy of the two criteria is the uncertainty which
still prevails over so many of our spiritual judgments.  There
are moments of sentimental and mystical experience–we shall
hereafter hear much of them–that carry an enormous sense of
inner authority and illumination with them when they come.  But
they come seldom, and they do not come to everyone; and the rest
of life makes either no connection with them, or tends to
contradict them more than it confirms them.  Some persons follow
more the voice of the moment in these cases, some prefer to be
guided by the average results.  Hence the sad discordancy of so
many of the spiritual judgments of human beings; a discordancy
which will be brought home to us acutely enough before these
lectures end.
It is, however, a discordancy that can never be resolved by any
merely medical test.  A good example of the impossibility of
holding strictly to the medical tests is seen in the theory of
the pathological causation of genius promulgated by recent
authors.  “Genius,” said Dr. Moreau, “is but one of the many
branches of the neuropathic tree.”  “Genius,” says Dr. Lombroso,
"is a symptom of hereditary degeneration of the epileptoid
variety, and is allied to moral insanity.”   “Whenever a man’s
life,” writes Mr. Nisbet, “is at once sufficiently illustrious
and recorded with sufficient fullness to be a subject of
profitable study, he inevitably falls into the morbid category. .
. .  And it is worthy of remark that, as a rule, the greater the
genius, the greater the unsoundness."[3]
[3]  J. F. Nisbet:  The Insanity of Genius, 3d ed., London, 1893,
pp. xvi., xxiv.
Now do these authors, after having succeeded in establishing to
their own satisfaction that the works of genius are fruits of
disease, consistently proceed thereupon to impugn the VALUE of
the fruits?  Do they deduce a new spiritual judgment from their
new doctrine of existential conditions? Do they frankly forbid us
to admire the productions of genius from now onwards?  and say
outright that no neuropath can ever be a revealer of new truth?
No! their immediate spiritual instincts are too strong for them
here, and hold their own against inferences which, in mere love
of logical consistency, medical materialism ought to be only too
glad to draw.  One disciple of the school, indeed, has striven to
impugn the value of works of genius in a wholesale way (such
works of contemporary art, namely, as he himself is unable to
enjoy, and they are many) by using medical arguments.[4]  But for
the most part the masterpieces are left unchallenged; and the
medical line of attack either confines itself to such secular
productions as everyone admits to be intrinsically eccentric, or
else addresses itself exclusively to religious manifestations. 
And then it is because the religious manifestations have been
already condemned because the critic dislikes them on internal or
spiritual grounds.
[4]  Max Nordau, in his bulky book entitled Degeneration.
In the natural sciences and industrial arts it never occurs to
anyone to try to refute opinions by showing up their author’s
neurotic constitution.  Opinions here are invariably tested by
logic and by experiment, no matter what may be their author’s
neurological type.  It should be no otherwise with religious
opinions.  Their value can only be ascertained by spiritual
judgments directly passed upon them, judgments based on our own
immediate feeling primarily; and secondarily on what we can
ascertain of their experiential relations to our moral needs and
to the rest of what we hold as true.
Immediate luminousness, in short, philosophical reasonableness,
and moral helpfulness are the only available criteria. Saint
Teresa might have had the nervous system of the placidest cow,
and it would not now save her theology, if the trial of the
theology by these other tests should show it to be contemptible. 
And conversely if her theology can stand these other tests, it
will make no difference how hysterical or nervously off her
balance Saint Teresa may have been when she was with us here
below.
You see that at bottom we are thrown back upon the general
principles by which the empirical philosophy has always contended
that we must be guided in our search for truth.  Dogmatic
philosophies have sought for tests for truth which might dispense
us from appealing to the future. Some direct mark, by noting
which we can be protected immediately and absolutely, now and
forever, against all mistake–such has been the darling dream of
philosophic dogmatists.  It is clear that the ORIGIN of the truth
would be an admirable criterion of this sort, if only the various
origins could be discriminated from one another from this 
point of view, and the history of dogmatic opinion shows that
origin has always been a favorite test.  Origin in immediate
intuition; origin in pontifical authority; origin in supernatural
revelation, as by vision, hearing, or unaccountable impression;
origin in direct possession by a higher spirit, expressing itself
in prophecy and warning; origin in automatic utterance
generally–these origins have been stock warrants for the truth
of one opinion after another which we find represented in
religious history.  The medical materialists are therefore only
so many belated dogmatists, neatly turning the tables on their
predecessors by using the criterion of origin in a destructive
instead of an accreditive way.
They are effective with their talk of pathological origin only so
long as supernatural origin is pleaded by the other side, and
nothing but the argument from origin is under discussion.  But
the argument from origin has seldom been used alone, for it is
too obviously insufficient.  Dr. Maudsley is perhaps the
cleverest of the rebutters of supernatural religion on grounds of
origin.  Yet he finds himself forced to write:–
“What right have we to believe Nature under any obligation to do
her work by means of complete minds only?  She may find an
incomplete mind a more suitable instrument for a particular
purpose.  It is the work that is done, and the quality in the
worker by which it was done, that is alone of moment; and it may
be no great matter from a cosmical standpoint, if in other
qualities of character he was singularly defective–if indeed he
were hypocrite, adulterer, eccentric, or lunatic. . . .  Home we
come again, then, to the old and last resort of certitude–namely
the common assent of mankind, or of the competent by instruction
and training among mankind."[5]
[5]  H. Maudsley:  Natural Causes and Supernatural Seemings,
1886, pp. 256, 257.
In other words, not its origin, but THE WAY IN WHICH IT WORKS ON
THE WHOLE, is Dr. Maudsley’s final test of a belief.  This is our
own empiricist criterion; and this criterion the stoutest
insisters on supernatural origin have also been forced to use in
the end.  Among the visions and messages some have always been
too patently silly, among the trances and convulsive seizures
some have been too fruitless for conduct and character, to pass
themselves off as significant, still less as divine.  In the
history of Christian mysticism the problem how to discriminate
between such messages and experiences as were really divine
miracles, and such others as the demon in his malice was able to
counterfeit, thus making the religious person twofold more the
child of hell he was before, has always been a difficult one to
solve, needing all the sagacity and experience of the best
directors of conscience.  In the end it had to come to our
empiricist criterion:  By their fruits ye shall know them, not by
their roots.  Jonathan Edwards’s Treatise on Religious Affections
is an elaborate working out of this thesis.  The ROOTS of a man’s
virtue are inaccessible to us.  No appearances whatever are
infallible proofs of grace.  Our practice is the only sure
evidence, even to ourselves, that we are genuinely Christians.
“In forming a judgment of ourselves now,” Edwards writes, we
should certainly adopt that evidence which our supreme Judge will
chiefly make use of when we come to stand before him at the last
day. . . .  There is not one grace of the Spirit of God, of the
existence of which, in any professor of religion, Christian
practice is not the most decisive evidence. . . .  The degree in
which our experience is productive of practice shows the degree
in which our experience is spiritual and divine.”
Catholic writers are equally emphatic.  The good dispositions
which a vision, or voice, or other apparent heavenly favor leave
behind them are the only marks by which we <22> may be sure they
are not possible deceptions of the tempter.  Says Saint Teresa:–
“Like imperfect sleep which, instead of giving more strength to
the head, doth but leave it the more exhausted, the result of
mere operations of the imagination is but to weaken the soul.
Instead of nourishment and energy she reaps only lassitude and
disgust:  whereas a genuine heavenly vision yields to her a
harvest of ineffable spiritual riches, and an admirable renewal
of bodily strength.  I alleged these reasons to those who so
often accused my visions of being the work of the enemy of
mankind and the sport of my imagination. . . .  I showed them the
jewels which the divine hand had left with me:–they were my
actual dispositions.  All those who knew me saw that I was
changed; my confessor bore witness to the fact; this improvement,
palpable in all respects, far from being hidden, was brilliantly
evident to all men.  As for myself, it was impossible to believe
that if the demon were its author, he could have used, in order
to lose me and lead me to hell, an expedient so contrary to his
own interests as that of uprooting my vices, and filling me with
masculine courage and other virtues instead, for I saw clearly
that a single one of these visions was enough to enrich me with
all that wealth."[6]
[6]  Autobiography, ch. xxviii.
I fear I may have made a longer excursus than was necessary, and
that fewer words would have dispelled the uneasiness which may
have arisen among some of you as I announced my pathological
programme.  At any rate you must all be ready now to judge the
religious life by its results exclusively, and I shall assume
that the bugaboo of morbid origin will scandalize your piety no
more.
Still, you may ask me, if its results are to be the ground of our
final spiritual estimate of a religious phenomenon, why threaten
us at all with so much existential study of its conditions?  Why
not simply leave pathological questions out?
To this I reply in two ways.  First, I say, irrepressible
curiosity imperiously leads one on; and I say, secondly, that it
always leads to a better understanding of a thing’s significance
to consider its exaggerations and perversions its equivalents and
substitutes and nearest relatives elsewhere.  Not that we may
thereby swamp the thing in the wholesale condemnation which we
pass on its inferior congeners, but rather that we may by
contrast ascertain the more precisely in what its merits consist,
by learning at the same time to what particular dangers of
corruption it may also be exposed.
Insane conditions have this advantage, that they isolate special
factors of the mental life, and enable us to inspect them
unmasked by their more usual surroundings.  They play the part in
mental anatomy which the scalpel and the microscope play in the
anatomy of the body.  To understand a thing rightly we need to
see it both out of its environment and in it, and to have
acquaintance with the whole range of its variations.  The study
of hallucinations has in this way been for psychologists the key
to their comprehension of normal sensation, that of illusions has
been the key to the right comprehension of perception.  Morbid
impulses and imperative conceptions, “fixed ideas,” so called,
have thrown a flood of light on the psychology of the normal
will; and obsessions and delusions have performed the same
service for that of the normal faculty of belief.
Similarly, the nature of genius has been illuminated by the
attempts, of which I already made mention, to class it with
psychopathical phenomena.  Borderland insanity, crankiness,
insane temperament, loss of mental balance, psychopathic
degeneration (to use a few of the many synonyms by which it has
been called), has certain peculiarities and liabilities which,
when combined with a superior quality of intellect in an
individual, make it more probable that he will make his mark and
affect his age, than if his temperament were less neurotic. 
There is of course no special affinity between crankiness as such
and superior intellect,[7] for most psychopaths have feeble
intellects, and superior intellects more commonly have normal
nervous systems. But the psychopathic temperament, whatever be
the intellect with which it finds itself paired, often brings
with it ardor and excitability of character.  The cranky person
has extraordinary emotional susceptibility.  He
is liable to fixed ideas and obsessions.  His conceptions tend to
pass immediately into belief and action; and when he gets a new
idea, he has no rest till he proclaims it, or in some way “works
it off.”  “What shall I think of it?” a common person says to
himself about a vexed question; but in a “cranky” mind “What must
I do about it?” is the form the question tends to take.  In the
autobiography of that high-souled woman, Mrs. Annie Besant, I
read the following passage:  “Plenty of people wish well to any
good cause, but very few care to exert themselves to help it, and
still fewer will risk anything in its support.  ’Someone ought to
do it, but why should I?’ is the ever reechoed phrase of
weak-kneed amiability. ’Someone ought to do it, so why not I?’ is
the cry of some earnest servant of man, eagerly forward springing
to face some perilous duty.  Between these two sentences lie
whole centuries of moral evolution.”  True enough! and between
these two sentences lie also the different destinies of the
ordinary sluggard and the psychopathic man.  Thus, when a
superior intellect and a psychopathic temperament coalesce–as in
the endless permutations and combinations of human faculty, they
are bound to coalesce often enough–in the same individual, we
have the best possible condition for the kind of effective genius
that gets into the <25> biographical dictionaries.  Such men do
not remain mere critics and understanders with their intellect. 
Their ideas possess them, they inflict them, for better or worse,
upon their companions or their age.  It is they who get counted
when Messrs. Lombroso, Nisbet, and others invoke statistics to
defend their paradox.
[7]  Superior intellect, as Professor Bain has admirably shown,
seems to consist in nothing so much as in a large development of
the faculty of association by similarity.
To pass now to religious phenomena, take the melancholy which, as
we shall see, constitutes an essential moment in every complete
religious evolution.  Take the happiness which achieved religious
belief confers.  Take the trancelike states of insight into truth
which all religious mystics report.[8]  These are each and all of
them special cases of kinds of human experience of much wider
scope.  Religious melancholy, whatever peculiarities it may have
qua religious, is at any rate melancholy.  Religious happiness is
happiness. Religious trance is trance.  And the moment we
renounce the absurd notion that a thing is exploded away as soon
as it is classed with others, or its origin is shown; the moment
we agree to stand by experimental results and inner quality, in
judging of values–who does not see that we are likely to
ascertain the distinctive significance of religious melancholy
and happiness, or of religious trances, far better by comparing
them as conscientiously as we can with other varieties of
melancholy, happiness, and trance, than by refusing to consider
their place in any more general series, and treating them as if
they were outside of nature’s order altogether?
I hope that the course of these lectures will confirm us in this
supposition.  As regards the psychopathic origin of so many
religious phenomena, that would not be in the least surprising or
disconcerting, even were such phenomena certified from on high to
be the most precious of human experiences.  No one organism can
possibly yield to its owner the whole body of truth.  Few of us
are not in some way infirm, or even diseased; and our very
infirmities help us unexpectedly.  In the psychopathic
temperament we have the emotionality which is the sine qua non of
moral perception; we have the intensity and tendency to emphasis
which are the essence of practical moral vigor; and we have the
love of metaphysics and mysticism which carry one’s interests
beyond the surface of the sensible world. What, then, is more
natural than that this temperament should introduce one to
regions of religious truth, to corners of the universe, which
your robust Philistine type of nervous system, forever offering
its biceps to be felt, thumping its breast, and thanking Heaven
that it hasn’t a single morbid fiber in its composition, would be
sure to hide forever from its self-satisfied possessors?
[8]  I may refer to a criticism of the insanity theory of genius
in the Psychological Review, ii. 287 (1895).
If there were such a thing as inspiration from a higher realm, it
might well be that the neurotic temperament would furnish the
chief condition of the requisite receptivity. And having said
thus much, I think that I may let the matter of religion and
neuroticism drop.
The mass of collateral phenomena, morbid or healthy, with which
the various religious phenomena must be compared in order to
understand them better, forms what in the slang of pedagogics is
termed “the apperceiving mass” by which we comprehend them.  The
only novelty that I can imagine this course of lectures to
possess lies in the breadth of the apperceiving mass.  I may
succeed in discussing religious experiences in a wider context
than has been usual in university courses.
Most books on the philosophy of religion try to begin with a
precise definition of what its essence consists of.  Some of
these would-be definitions may possibly come before us in later
portions of this course, and I shall not be pedantic enough to
enumerate any of them to you now. Meanwhile the very fact that
they are so many and so different from one another is enough to
prove that the word “religion” cannot stand for any single
principle or essence, but is rather a collective name.  The
theorizing mind tends always to the oversimplification of its
materials.  This is the root of all that absolutism and one-sided
dogmatism by which both philosophy and religion have been
infested.  Let us not fall immediately into a one-sided view of
our subject, but let us rather admit freely at the outset that we
may very likely find no one essence, but many characters which
may alternately be equally important to religion.  If we should
inquire for the essence of “government,” for example, one man
might tell us it was authority, another submission, an other
police, another an army, another an assembly, an other a system
of laws; yet all the while it would be true that no concrete
government can exist without all these things, one of which is
more important at one moment and others at another.  The man who
knows governments most completely is he who troubles himself
least about a definition which shall give their essence. 
Enjoying an intimate acquaintance with all their particularities
in turn, he would naturally regard an abstract conception in
which these were unified as a thing more misleading than
enlightening.  And why may not religion be a conception equally
complex?[9]
[9]  I can do no better here than refer my readers to the
extended and admirable remarks on the futility of all these
definitions of religion, in an article by Professor Leuba,
published in the Monist for January, 1901, after my own text was
written.
Consider also the “religious sentiment” which we see referred to
in so many books, as if it were a single sort of mental entity. 
In the psychologies and in the philosophies of religion, we find
the authors attempting to specify just what entity it is.  One
man allies it to the feeling of dependence; one makes it a
derivative from fear; others connect it with the sexual life;
others still identify it with the feeling of the infinite; and so
on.  Such different ways of conceiving it ought of themselves to
arouse doubt as to whether it possibly can be one specific thing;
and the moment we are willing to treat the term “religious
sentiment” as a collective name for the many sentiments which
religious objects may arouse in alternation, we see that it
probably contains nothing whatever of a psychologically specific
nature. There is religious fear, religious love, religious awe,
religious joy, and so forth.  But religious love is only man’s
natural emotion of love directed to a religious object; religious
fear is only the ordinary fear of commerce, so to speak, the
common quaking of the human breast, in so far as the notion of
divine retribution may arouse it; religious awe is the same
organic thrill which we feel in a forest at twilight, or in a
mountain gorge; only this time it comes over us at the thought of
our supernatural relations; and similarly of all the various
sentiments which may be called into play in the lives of
religious persons.  As concrete states of mind, made up of a
feeling PLUS a specific sort of object, religious emotions of
course are psychic entities distinguishable from other concrete
emotions; but there is no ground for assuming a simple abstract
"religious emotion” to exist as a distinct elementary mental
affection by itself, present in every religious experience
without exception.
As there thus seems to be no one elementary religious emotion,
but only a common storehouse of emotions upon which religious
objects may draw, so there might conceivably also prove to he no
one specific and essential kind of religious object, and no one
specific and essential kind of religious act.
The field of religion being as wide as this, it is manifestly
impossible that I should pretend to cover it.  My lectures must
be limited to a fraction of the subject.  And, although it would
indeed be foolish to set up an abstract definition of religion’s
essence, and then proceed to defend that definition against all
comers, yet this need not prevent me from taking my own narrow
view of what religion shall consist in FOR THE PURPOSE OF THESE
LECTURES, or, out of the many meanings of the word, from choosing
the one meaning in which I wish to interest you particularly, and
proclaiming arbitrarily that when I say “religion” I mean THAT. 
This, in fact, is what I must do, and I will now preliminarily
seek to mark out the field I choose.
One way to mark it out easily is to say what aspects of the
subject we leave out.  At the outset we are struck by one great
partition which divides the religious field.  On the one side of
it lies institutional, on the other personal religion. As M. P.
Sabatier says, one branch of religion keeps the divinity, another
keeps man most in view.  Worship and sacrifice, procedures for
working on the dispositions of the deity, theology and ceremony
and ecclesiastical organization, are the essentials of religion
in the institutional branch. Were we to limit our view to it, we
should have to define religion as an external art, the art of
winning the favor of the gods.  In the more personal branch of
religion it is on the contrary the inner dispositions of man
himself which form the center of interest, his conscience, his
deserts, his helplessness, his incompleteness.  And although the
favor of the God, as forfeited or gained, is still an essential
feature of the story, and theology plays a vital part therein,
yet the acts to which this sort of religion prompts are personal
not ritual acts, the individual transacts the business by himself
alone, and the ecclesiastical organization, with its priests and
sacraments and other go-betweens, sinks to an altogether
secondary place.  The relation goes direct from heart to heart,
from soul to soul, between man and his maker.
Now in these lectures I propose to ignore the institutional
branch entirely, to say nothing of the ecclesiastical
organization, to consider as little as possible the systematic
theology and the ideas about the gods themselves, and to confine
myself as far as I can to personal religion pure and simple.  To
some of you personal religion, thus nakedly considered, will no
doubt seem too incomplete a thing to wear the general name.  “It
is a part of religion,” you will say, “but only its unorganized
rudiment; if we are to name it by itself, we had better call it
man’s conscience or morality than his religion.  The name
’religion’ should be reserved for the fully organized system of
feeling, thought, and institution, for the Church, in short, of
which this personal religion, so called, is but a fractional
element.”
But if you say this, it will only show the more plainly how much
the question of definition tends to become a dispute about names.
Rather than prolong such a dispute, I am willing to accept almost
any name for the personal religion of which I propose to treat. 
Call it conscience or morality, if you yourselves prefer, and not
religion–under either name it will be equally worthy of our
study.  As for myself, I think it will prove to contain some
elements which morality pure and simple does not contain, and
these elements I shall soon seek to point out; so I will myself
continue to apply the word “religion” to it; and in the last
lecture of all, I will bring in the theologies and the
ecclesiasticisms, and say something of its relation to them.
In one sense at least the personal religion will prove itself
more fundamental than either theology or ecclesiasticism.
Churches, when once established, live at second-hand upon
tradition; but the FOUNDERS of every church owed their power
originally to the fact of their direct personal communion with
the divine.  Not only the superhuman founders, the Christ, the
Buddha, Mahomet, but all the originators of Christian sects have
been in this case;–so personal religion should still seem the
primordial thing, even to those who continue to esteem it
incomplete.
There are, it is true, other things in religion chronologically
more primordial than personal devoutness in the moral sense. 
Fetishism and magic seem to have preceded inward piety
historically–at least our records of inward piety do not reach
back so far.  And if fetishism and magic be regarded as stages of
religion, one may say that personal religion in the inward sense
and the genuinely spiritual ecclesiasticisms which it founds are
phenomena of secondary or even tertiary order.  But, quite apart
from the fact that many anthropologists–for instance, Jevons and
Frazer –expressly oppose “religion” and “magic” to each other,
it is certain that the whole system of thought which leads to
magic, fetishism, and the lower superstitions may just as well be
called primitive science as called primitive religion. The
question thus becomes a verbal one again; and our knowledge of
all these early stages of thought and feeling is in any case so
conjectural and imperfect that farther discussion would not be
worth while.
Religion, therefore, as I now ask you arbitrarily to take it,
shall mean for us THE FEELINGS, ACTS, AND EXPERIENCES OF
INDIVIDUAL MEN IN THEIR SOLITUDE, SO FAR AS THEY APPREHEND
THEMSELVES TO STAND IN RELATION TO WHATEVER THEY MAY CONSIDER THE
DIVINE.  Since the relation may be either moral, physical, or
ritual, it is evident that out of religion in the sense in which
we take it, theologies, philosophies, and ecclesiastical
organizations may secondarily grow.  In these lectures, however,
as I have already said, the immediate personal experiences will
amply fill our time, and we shall hardly consider theology or
ecclesiasticism at all.
We escape much controversial matter by this arbitrary definition
of our field.  But, still, a chance of controversy comes up over
the word “divine,” if we take the definition in too narrow a
sense.  There are systems of thought which the world usually
calls religious, and yet which do not positively assume a God. 
Buddhism is in this case.  Popularly, of course, the Buddha
himself stands in place of a God; but in strictness the
Buddhistic system is atheistic.  Modern transcendental idealism,
Emersonianism, for instance, also seems to let God evaporate into
abstract Ideality.  Not a deity in concreto, not a superhuman
person, but the immanent divinity in things, the essentially
spiritual structure of the universe, is the object of the
transcendentalist cult.  In that address to the graduating class
at Divinity College in 1838 which made Emerson famous, the frank
expression of this worship of mere abstract laws was what made
the scandal of the performance.
“These laws,” said the speaker, “execute themselves.  They are
out of time, out of space, and not subject to circumstance: 
Thus, in the soul of man there is a justice whose retributions
are instant and entire.  He who does a good deed is instantly
ennobled.  He who does a mean deed is by the action itself
contracted.  He who puts off impurity thereby puts on purity.  If
a man is at heart just, then in so far is he God; the safety of
God, the immortality of God, the majesty of God, do enter into
that man with justice.  If a man dissemble, deceive, he deceives
himself, and goes out of acquaintance with his own being. 
Character is always known.  Thefts never enrich; alms never
impoverish; murder will speak out of stone walls.  The least
admixture of a lie–for example, the taint of vanity, any attempt
to make a good impression, a favorable appearance–will instantly
vitiate the effect.  But speak the truth, and all things alive or
brute are vouchers, and the very roots of the grass underground
there do seem to stir and move to bear your witness.  For all
things proceed out of the same spirit, which is differently named
love, justice, temperance, in its different applications, just as
the ocean receives different names on the several shores which it
washes.  In so far as he roves from these ends, a man bereaves
himself of power, of auxiliaries.  His being shrinks .  . . he
becomes less and less, a mote, a point, until absolute badness is
absolute death.  The perception of this law awakens in the mind a
sentiment which we call the religious sentiment, and which makes
our highest happiness.  Wonderful is its power to charm and to
command.  It is a mountain air.  It is the embalmer of the world.
It makes the sky and the hills sublime, and the silent song of
the stars is it.  It is the beatitude of man.  It makes him
illimitable.  When he says ’I ought’; when love warns him; when
he chooses, warned from on high, the good and great deed; then,
deep melodies wander through his soul from supreme wisdom.  Then
he can worship, and be enlarged by his worship; for he can never
go behind this sentiment.  All the expressions of this sentiment
are sacred and permanent in proportion to their purity.  [They]
affect us more than all other compositions. The sentences of the
olden time, which ejaculate this piety, are still fresh and
fragrant.  And the unique impression of Jesus upon mankind, whose
name is not so much written as ploughed into the history of this
world, is proof of the subtle virtue of this infusion."[10]
[10] Miscellanies, 1868, p. 120 (abridged).
Such is the Emersonian religion.  The universe has a divine soul
of order, which soul is moral, being also the soul within the
soul of man.  But whether this soul of the universe be a mere
quality like the eye’s brilliancy or the skin’s softness, or
whether it be a self-conscious life like the eye’s seeing or the
skin’s feeling, is a decision that never unmistakably appears in
Emerson’s pages.  It quivers on the boundary of these things,
sometimes leaning one way sometimes the other, to suit the
literary rather than the philosophic need.  Whatever it is,
though, it is active.  As much as if it were a God, we can trust
it to protect all ideal interests and keep the world’s balance
straight.  The sentences in which Emerson, to the very end, gave
utterance to this faith are as fine as anything in literature: 
"If you love and serve men, you cannot by any hiding or stratagem
escape the remuneration.  Secret retributions are always
restoring the level, when disturbed, of the divine justice.  It
is impossible to tilt the beam.  All the tyrants and proprietors
and monopolists of the world in vain set their shoulders to heave
the bar.  Settles forevermore the ponderous equator to its line,
and man and mote, and star and sun, must range to it, or be
pulverized by the recoil."[11]
[11] Lectures and Biographical Sketches, 1868, p. 186.
Now it would be too absurd to say that the inner experiences that
underlie such expressions of faith as this and impel the writer
to their utterance are quite unworthy to be called religious
experiences.  The sort of appeal that Emersonian optimism, on the
one hand, and Buddhistic pessimism, on the other, make to the
individual and the son of response which he makes to them in his
life are in fact indistinguishable from, and in many respects
identical with, the best Christian appeal and response.  We must
therefore, from the experiential point of view, call these
godless or quasi-godless creeds “religions"; and accordingly when
in our definition of religion we speak of the individual’s
relation to “what he considers the divine,” we must interpret the
term “divine” very broadly, as denoting any object that is god-
LIKE, whether it be a concrete deity or not.  But the term
"godlike,” if thus treated as a floating general quality, becomes
exceedingly vague, for many gods have flourished in religious
history, and their attributes have been discrepant enough.  What
then is that essentially godlike quality–be it embodied in a
concrete deity or not–our relation to which determines our
character as religious men?  It will repay us to seek some answer
to this question before we proceed farther.
For one thing, gods are conceived to be first things in the way
of being and power.  They overarch and envelop, and from them
there is no escape.  What relates to them is the first and last
word in the way of truth.  Whatever then were most primal and
enveloping and deeply true might at this rate be treated as
godlike, and a man’s religion might thus be identified with his
attitude, whatever it might be, toward what he felt to be the
primal truth.
Such a definition as this would in a way be defensible. Religion,
whatever it is, is a man’s total reaction upon life, so why not
say that any total reaction upon life is a religion? Total
reactions are different from casual reactions, and total
attitudes are different from usual or professional attitudes.  To
get at them you must go behind the foreground of existence and
reach down to that curious sense of the whole residual cosmos as
an everlasting presence, intimate or alien, terrible or amusing,
lovable or odious, which in some degree everyone possesses.  This
sense of the world’s presence, appealing as it does to our
peculiar individual temperament, makes us either strenuous or
careless, devout or blasphemous, gloomy or exultant, about life
at large; and our reaction, involuntary and inarticulate and
often half unconscious as it is, is the completest of all our
answers to the question, “What is the character of this universe
in which we dwell?”  It expresses our individual sense of it in
the most definite way.  Why then not call these reactions our
religion, no matter what specific character they may have? 
Non-religious as some of these reactions may be, in one sense of
the word “religious,” they yet belong to THE GENERAL SPHERE OF
THE RELIGIOUS LIFE, and so should generically be classed as
religious reactions.  “He believes in No-God, and he worships
him,” said a colleague of mine of a student who was manifesting a
fine atheistic ardor; and the more fervent opponents of Christian
doctrine have often enough shown a temper which, psychologically
considered, is indistinguishable from religious zeal.
But so very broad a use of the word “religion” would be
inconvenient, however defensible it might remain on logical
grounds.  There are trifling, sneering attitudes even toward the
whole of life; and in some men these attitudes are final and
systematic.  It would strain the ordinary use of language too
much to call such attitudes religious, even though, from the
point of view of an unbiased critical philosophy, they might
conceivably be perfectly reasonable ways of looking upon life. 
Voltaire, for example, writes thus to a friend, at the age of
seventy-three:  “As for myself,” he says, “weak as I am, I carry
on the war to the last moment, I get a hundred pike-thrusts, I
return two hundred, and I laugh.  I see near my door Geneva on
fire with quarrels over nothing, and I laugh again; and, thank
God, I can look upon the world as a farce even when it becomes as
tragic as it sometimes does. All comes out even at the end of the
day, and all comes out still more even when all the days are
over.”
Much as we may admire such a robust old gamecock spirit in a
valetudinarian, to call it a religious spirit would be odd.  Yet
it is for the moment Voltaire’s reaction on the whole of life. 
Je me’n fiche is the vulgar French equivalent for our English
ejaculation “Who cares?”   And the happy term je me’n fichisme
recently has been invented to designate the systematic
determination not to take anything in <37> life too solemnly. 
"All is vanity” is the relieving word in all difficult crises for
this mode of thought, which that exquisite literary genius Renan
took pleasure, in his later days of sweet decay, in putting into
coquettishly sacrilegious forms which remain to us as excellent
expressions of the “all is vanity” state of mind.  Take the
following passage, for example–we must hold to duty, even
against the evidence, Renan says–but he then goes on:–
“There are many chances that the world may be nothing but a fairy
pantomime of which no God has care.  We must therefore arrange
ourselves so that on neither hypothesis we shall be completely
wrong.  We must listen to the superior voices, but in such a way
that if the second hypothesis were true we should not have been
too completely duped.  If in effect the world be not a serious
thing, it is the dogmatic people who will be the shallow ones,
and the worldly minded whom the theologians now call frivolous
will be those who are really wise.
“In utrumque paratus, then.  Be ready for anything–that perhaps
is wisdom.  Give ourselves up, according to the hour, to
confidence, to skepticism, to optimism, to irony and we may be
sure that at certain moments at least we shall be with the truth.
. . .  Good-humor is a philosophic state of mind; it seems to say
to Nature that we take her no more seriously than she takes us. 
I maintain that one should always talk of philosophy with a
smile.  We owe it to the Eternal to be virtuous but we have the
right to add to this tribute our irony as a sort of personal
reprisal.  In this way we return to the right quarter jest for
jest; we play the trick that has been played on us. Saint
Augustine’s phrase:  Lord, if we arc deceived, it is by thee!
remains a fine one, well suited to our modern feeling.  Only we
wish the Eternal to know that if we accept the fraud, we accept
it knowingly and willingly.  We are resigned in advance to losing
the interest on our investments of virtue, but we wish not to
appear ridiculous by having counted on them too securely."[12]
[12] Feuilles detachees, pp. 394-398 (abridged).
Surely all the usual associations of the word “religion” would
have to be stripped away if such a systematic parti pris of irony
were also to be denoted by the name.  For common men “religion,"
whatever more special meanings it may have, signifies always a
SERIOUS state of mind.  If any one phrase could gather its
universal message, that phrase would be, “All is not vanity in
this Universe, whatever the appearances may suggest.”  If it can
stop anything, religion as commonly apprehended can stop just
such chaffing talk as Renan’s.  It favors gravity, not pertness;
it says “hush” to all vain chatter and smart wit.
But if hostile to light irony, religion is equally hostile to
heavy grumbling and complaint.  The world appears tragic enough
in some religions, but the tragedy is realized as purging, and a
way of deliverance is held to exist. We shall see enough of the
religious melancholy in a future lecture; but melancholy,
according to our ordinary use of language, forfeits all title to
be called religious when, in Marcus Aurelius’s racy words, the
sufferer simply lies kicking and screaming after the fashion of a
sacrificed pig.  The mood of a Schopenhauer or a Nietzsche–and
in a less degree one may sometimes say the same of our own sad
Carlyle–though often an ennobling sadness, is almost as often
only peevishness running away with the bit between its teeth. 
The sallies of the two German authors remind one, half the time,
of the sick shriekings of two dying rats.  They lack the
purgatorial note which religious sadness gives forth.
There must be something solemn, serious, and tender about any
attitude which we denominate religious.  If glad, it must not
grin or snicker; if sad, it must not scream or curse.  It is
precisely as being SOLEMN experiences that I wish to interest you
in religious experiences.  So I propose–arbitrarily again, if
you please–to narrow our definition once more by saying that the
word “divine,” as employed therein, shall mean for us not merely
the primal and enveloping and real, for that meaning if taken
without restriction might prove too broad.  The divine shall mean
for us only such a primal reality as the individual feels
impelled to respond to solemnly and gravely, and neither by a
curse nor a jest.
But solemnity, and gravity, and all such emotional attributes,
admit of various shades; and, do what we will with our defining,
the truth must at last be confronted that we are dealing with a
field of experience where there is not a single conception that
can be sharply drawn.  The pretension, under such conditions, to
be rigorously “scientific” or “exact” in our terms would only
stamp us as lacking in understanding of our task.  Things are
more or less divine, states of mind are more or less religious,
reactions are more or less total, but the boundaries are always
misty, and it is everywhere a question of amount and degree. 
Nevertheless, at their extreme of development, there can never be
any question as to what experiences are religious.  The divinity
of the object and the solemnity of the reaction are too well
marked for doubt.  Hesitation as to whether a state of mind is
"religious,” or “irreligious,” or “moral,” or “philosophical,” is
only likely to arise when the state of mind is weakly
characterized, but in that case it will be hardly worthy of our
study at all.  With states that can only by courtesy be called
religious we need have nothing to do, our only profitable
business being with what nobody can possibly feel tempted to call
anything else.  I said in my former lecture that we learn most
about a thing when we view it under a microscope, as it were, or
in its most exaggerated form.  This is as true of religious
phenomena as of any other kind of fact.  The only cases likely to
be profitable enough to repay our attention will therefore be
cases where the religious spirit is unmistakable and extreme. 
Its fainter manifestations we may tranquilly pass by.  Here, for
example, is the total reaction upon life of Frederick Locker
Lampson, whose autobiography, entitled  “Confidences,” proves him
to have been a most amiable man.
“I am so far resigned to my lot that I feel small pain at the
thought of having to part from what has been called the pleasant
habit of existence, the sweet fable of life.  I would not care to
live my wasted life over again, and so to prolong my span. 
Strange to say, I have but little wish to be younger.  I submit
with a chill at my heart.  I humbly submit because it is the
Divine Will, and my appointed destiny.  I dread the increase of
infirmities that will make me a burden to those around me, those
dear to me.  No! let me slip away as quietly and comfortably as I
can.  Let the end come, if peace come with it.
“I do not know that there is a great deal to be said for this
world, or our sojourn here upon it; but it has pleased God so to
place us, and it must please me also.  I ask you, what is human
life?  Is not it a maimed happiness–care and weariness,
weariness and care, with the baseless expectation, the strange
cozenage of a brighter to-morrow?  At best it is but a froward
child, that must be played with and humored, to keep it quiet
till it falls asleep, and then the care is over."[13]
[13] Op. cit., pp. 314, 313.
This is a complex, a tender, a submissive, and a graceful state
of mind.  For myself, I should have no objection to calling it on
the whole a religious state of mind, although I dare say that to
many of you it may seem too listless and half-hearted to merit so
good a name.  But what matters it in the end whether we call such
a state of mind religious or not?  It is too insignificant for
our instruction in any case; and its very possessor wrote it down
in terms which he would not have used unless he had been thinking
of more energetically religious moods in others, with which he
found himself unable to compete.  It is with these more energetic
states that our sole business lies, and we can perfectly well
afford to let the minor notes and the uncertain border go.  It
was the extremer cases that I had in mind a little while ago
when I said that personal religion, even without theology or
ritual, would prove to embody some elements that morality pure
and simple does not contain.  You may remember that I promised
shortly to point out what those elements were.  In a general way
I can now say what I had in mind.
“I accept the universe” is reported to have been a favorite
utterance of our New England transcendentalist, Margaret Fuller;
and when some one repeated this phrase to Thomas Carlyle, his
sardonic comment is said to have been:  “Gad! she’d better!”  At
bottom the whole concern of both morality and religion is with
the manner of our acceptance of the universe.  Do we accept it
only in part and grudgingly, or heartily and altogether?  Shall
our protests against certain things in it be radical and
unforgiving, or shall we think that, even with evil, there are
ways of living that must lead to good?  If we accept the whole,
shall we do so as if stunned into submission–as Carlyle would
have us–"Gad! we’d better!"–or shall we do so with enthusiastic
assent?  Morality pure and simple accepts the law of the whole
which it finds reigning, so far as to acknowledge and obey it,
but it may obey it with the heaviest and coldest heart, and never
cease to feel it as a yoke.  But for religion, in its strong and
fully developed manifestations, the service of the highest never
is felt as a yoke.  Dull submission is left far behind, and a
mood of welcome, which may fill any place on the scale between
cheerful serenity and enthusiastic gladness, has taken its place.
It makes a tremendous emotional and practical difference to one
whether one accept the universe in the drab discolored way of
stoic resignation to necessity, or with the passionate happiness
of Christian saints.  The difference is as great as that between
passivity and activity, as that between the defensive and the
aggressive mood.  Gradual as are the steps by which an individual
may grow from one state into the other, many as are the
intermediate stages which different individuals represent, yet
when you place the typical extremes beside each other for
comparison, you feel that two discontinuous psychological
universes confront you, and that in passing from one to the other
a “critical point” has been overcome.
If we compare stoic with Christian ejaculations we see much more
than a difference of doctrine; rather is it a difference of
emotional mood that parts them.  When Marcus Aurelius reflects on
the eternal reason that has ordered things, there is a frosty
chill about his words which you rarely find in a Jewish, and
never in a Christian piece of religious writing.  The universe is
"accepted” by all these writers; but how devoid of passion or
exultation the spirit of the Roman Emperor is!  Compare his fine
sentence:  “If gods care not for me or my children, here is a
reason for it,” with Job’s cry:  “Though he slay me, yet will I
trust in him!” and you immediately see the difference I mean. 
The anima mundi, to whose disposal of his own personal destiny
the Stoic consents, is there to be respected and submitted to,
but the Christian God is there to be loved; and the difference of
emotional atmosphere is like that between an arctic climate and
the tropics, though the outcome in the way of accepting actual
conditions uncomplainingly may seem in abstract terms to be much
the same.
“It is a man’s duty,” says Marcus Aurelius, “to comfort himself
and wait for the natural dissolution, and not to be vexed, but to
find refreshment solely in these thoughts–first that nothing
will happen to me which is not conformable to the nature of the
universe; and secondly that I need do nothing contrary to the God
and deity within me; for there is no man who can compel me to
transgress.  He is an abscess on the universe who withdraws
and separates himself from the reason of our common nature,
through being displeased with the things which happen.  For the
same nature produces these, and has produced thee too.  And so
accept everything which happens, even if it seem disagreeable,
because it leads to this, the health of the universe and to the
prosperity and felicity of Zeus.  For he would not have brought
on any man what he has brought if it were not useful for the
whole.  The integrity of the whole is mutilated if thou cuttest
off anything.  And thou dost cut off, as far as it is in thy
power, when thou art dissatisfied, and in a manner triest to put
anything out of the way."[14]
[14] Book V., ch. ix. (abridged).
Compare now this mood with that of the old Christian author of
the Theologia Germanica:–
“Where men are enlightened with the true light, they renounce all
desire and choice, and commit and commend themselves and all
things to the eternal Goodness, so that every enlightened man
could say:  ’I would fain be to the Eternal Goodness what his own
hand is to a man.’  Such men are in a state of freedom, because
they have lost the fear of pain or hell, and the hope of reward
or heaven, and are living in pure submission to the eternal
Goodness, in the perfect freedom of fervent love.  When a man
truly perceiveth and considereth himself, who and what he is, and
findeth himself utterly vile and wicked and unworthy, he falleth
into such a deep abasement that it seemeth to him reasonable that
all creatures in heaven and earth should rise up against him. 
And therefore he will not and dare not desire any consolation and
release; but he is willing to be unconsoled and unreleased; and
he doth not grieve over his sufferings, for they are right in his
eyes, and he hath nothing to say against them.  This is what is
meant by true repentance for sin; and he who in this present time
entereth into this hell, none may console him.  Now God hath not
forsaken a man in this hell, but He is laying his hand upon him,
that the man may not desire nor regard anything but the eternal
Good only.  And then, when the man neither careth for nor
desireth anything but the eternal Good alone, and seeketh not
himself nor his own things, but the honour of God only, he is
made a partaker of all manner of joy, bliss, peace, rest, and
consolation, and so the man is henceforth in the kingdom of
heaven.  This hell and this heaven are two good safe ways for a
man, and happy is he who truly findeth them."[15]
[15] Chaps. x., xi.  (abridged):  Winkworth’s translation.
How much more active and positive the impulse of the Christian
writer to accept his place in the universe is! Marcus Aurelius
agrees TO the scheme–the German theologian agrees WITH it.  He
literally ABOUNDS in agreement, he runs out to embrace the divine
decrees.
Occasionally, it is true, the stoic rises to something like a
Christian warmth of sentiment, as in the often quoted passage of
Marcus Aurelius:–
“Everything harmonizes with me which is harmonious to thee, O
Universe.  Nothing for me is too early nor too late, which is in
due time for thee.  Everything is fruit to me which thy seasons
bring, O Nature:  from thee are all things, in thee are all
things, to thee all things return.  The poet says, Dear City of
Cecrops; and wilt thou not say, Dear City of Zeus?"[16]
[16] Book IV., 523
But compare even as devout a passage as this with a genuine
Christian outpouring, and it seems a little cold. Turn, for
instance, to the Imitation of Christ:–
“Lord, thou knowest what is best; let this or that be according
as thou wilt.  Give what thou wilt, so much as thou wilt, when
thou wilt.  Do with me as thou knowest best, and as shall be most
to thine honour.  Place me where thou wilt, and freely work thy
will with me in all things. . . .  When could it be evil when
thou wert near?  I had rather be poor for thy sake than rich
without thee.  I choose rather to be a pilgrim upon the earth
with thee, than without thee to possess heaven.  Where thou art,
there is heaven; and where thou art not, behold there death and
hell."[17]
[17] Benham’s translation:  Book III., chaps.  xv., lix.  Compare
Mary Moody Emerson:  “Let me be a blot on this fair world, the
obscurest the loneliest sufferer, with one proviso–that I know
it is His agency.  I will love Him though He shed frost and
darkness on every way of mine.”  R. W. Emerson:  Lectures and
Biographical Sketches, p. 188.
It is a good rule in physiology, when we are studying the meaning
of an organ, to ask after its most peculiar and characteristic
sort of performance, and to seek its office in that one of its
functions which no other organ can possibly exert.  Surely the
same maxim holds good in our present quest.  The essence of
religious experiences, the thing by which we finally must judge
them, must be that element or quality in them which we can meet
nowhere else.  And such a quality will be of course most
prominent and easy to notice in those religious experiences which
are most one-sided, exaggerated, and intense.
Now when we compare these intenser experiences with the
experiences of tamer minds, so cool and reasonable that we are
tempted to call them philosophical rather than religious, we find
a character that is perfectly distinct.  That character, it seems
to me, should be regarded as the practically important
differentia of religion for our purpose; and just what it is can
easily be brought out by comparing the mind of an abstractly
conceived Christian with that of a moralist similarly conceived.
A life is manly, stoical, moral, or philosophical, we say, in
proportion as it is less swayed by paltry personal considerations
and more by objective ends that call for energy, even though that
energy bring personal loss and pain.  This is the good side of
war, in so far as it calls for “volunteers.”  And for morality
life is a war, and the service of the highest is a sort of cosmic
patriotism which also calls for volunteers.  Even a sick man,
unable to be militant outwardly, can carry on the moral warfare. 
He can willfully turn his attention away from his own future,
whether in this world or the next.  He can train himself to
indifference to his present drawbacks and immerse himself in
whatever objective interests still remain accessible.  He can
follow public news, and sympathize with other people’s affairs. 
He can cultivate cheerful manners, and be silent about his
miseries. He can contemplate whatever ideal aspects of existence
his philosophy is able to present to him, and practice whatever
duties, such as patience, resignation, trust, his ethical system
requires.  Such a man lives on his loftiest, largest plane.  He
is a high-hearted freeman and no pining slave.  And yet he lacks
something which the Christian par excellence, the mystic and
ascetic saint, for example, has in abundant measure, and which
makes of him a human being of an altogether different
denomination.
The Christian also spurns the pinched and mumping sick-room
attitude, and the lives of saints are full of a kind of
callousness to diseased conditions of body which probably no
other human records show.  But whereas the merely moralistic
spurning takes an effort of volition, the Christian spurning is
the result of the excitement of a higher kind of emotion, in the
presence of which no exertion of volition is required.  The
moralist must hold his breath and keep his muscles tense; and so
long as this athletic attitude is possible all goes
well–morality suffices.  But the athletic attitude tends ever to
break down, and it inevitably does break down even in the most
stalwart when the organism begins to decay, or when morbid fears
invade the mind.  To suggest personal will and effort to one all
sicklied o’er with the sense of irremediable impotence is to
suggest the most impossible of things.  What he craves is to be
consoled in his very powerlessness, to feel that the spirit of
the universe <47> recognizes and secures him, all decaying and
failing as he is.  Well, we are all such helpless failures in the
last resort.  The sanest and best of us are of one clay with
lunatics and prison inmates, and death finally runs the robustest
of us down.  And whenever we feel this, such a sense of the
vanity and provisionality of our voluntary career comes over us
that all our morality appears but as a plaster hiding a sore it
can never cure, and all our well-doing as the hollowest
substitute for that well-BEING that our lives ought to be
grounded in, but, alas! are not.
And here religion comes to our rescue and takes our fate into her
hands.  There is a state of mind, known to religious men, but to
no others, in which the will to assert ourselves and hold our own
has been displaced by a willingness to close our mouths and be as
nothing in the floods and waterspouts of God.  In this state of
mind, what we most dreaded has become the habitation of our
safety, and the hour of our moral death has turned into our
spiritual birthday.  The time for tension in our soul is over,
and that of happy relaxation, of calm deep breathing, of an
eternal present, with no discordant future to be anxious about,
has arrived.  Fear is not held in abeyance as it is by mere
morality, it is positively expunged and washed away.
We shall see abundant examples of this happy state of mind in
later lectures of this course.  We shall see how infinitely
passionate a thing religion at its highest flights can be.  Like
love, like wrath, like hope, ambition, jealousy, like every other
instinctive eagerness and impulse, it adds to life an enchantment
which is not rationally or logically deducible from anything
else.  This enchantment, coming as a gift when it does come–a
gift of our organism, the physiologists will tell us, a gift of
God’s grace, the theologians say –is either there or not there
for us, and there are persons who can no more become possessed by
it than they can fall in love with a given woman by mere word of
command.  Religious feeling is thus an absolute addition to the
Subject’s range of life.  It gives him a new sphere of power.
When the outward battle is lost, and the outer world disowns him,
it redeems and vivifies an interior world which otherwise would
be an empty waste.
If religion is to mean anything definite for us, it seems to me
that we ought to take it as meaning this added dimension of
emotion, this enthusiastic temper of espousal, in regions where
morality strictly so called can at best but bow its head and
acquiesce.  It ought to mean nothing short of this new reach of
freedom for us, with the struggle over, the keynote of the
universe sounding in our ears, and everlasting possession spread
before our eyes.[18]
[18] Once more, there are plenty of men, constitutionally sombre
men, in whose religious life this rapturousness is lacking.  They
are religious in the wider sense, yet in this acutest of all
senses they are not so, and it is religion in the acutest sense
that I wish, without disputing about words, to study first, so as
to get at its typical differentia.
This sort of happiness in the absolute and everlasting is what we
find nowhere but in religion.  It is parted off from all mere
animal happiness, all mere enjoyment of the present, by that
element of solemnity of which I have already made so much
account.  Solemnity is a hard thing to define abstractly, but
certain of its marks are patent enough. A solemn state of mind is
never crude or simple–it seems to contain a certain measure of
its own opposite in solution. A solemn joy preserves a sort of
bitter in its sweetness; a solemn sorrow is one to which we
intimately consent.  But there are writers who, realizing that
happiness of a supreme sort is the prerogative of religion,
forget this complication, and call all happiness, as such,
religious.  Mr. Havelock Ellis, for example, identifies religion
with the entire field of the soul’s liberation from oppressive
moods.
“The simplest functions of physiological life,” he writes may be
its ministers.  Every one who is at all acquainted with the
Persian mystics knows how wine may be regarded as an instrument
of religion.  Indeed, in all countries and in all ages some form
of physical enlargement–singing, dancing, drinking, sexual
excitement–has been intimately associated with worship. Even the
momentary expansion of the soul in laughter is, to however slight
an extent, a religious exercise. . . . Whenever an impulse from
the world strikes against the organism, and the resultant is not
discomfort or pain, not even the muscular contraction of
strenuous manhood, but a joyous expansion or aspiration of the
whole soul–there is religion. It is the infinite for which we
hunger, and we ride gladly on every little wave that promises to
bear us towards it."[19]
[19] The New Spirit, p. 232.
But such a straight identification of religion with any and every
form of happiness leaves the essential peculiarity of religious
happiness out.  The more commonplace happinesses which we get are
"reliefs,” occasioned by our momentary escapes from evils either
experienced or threatened. But in its most characteristic
embodiments, religious happiness is no mere feeling of escape. 
It cares no longer to escape.  It consents to the evil outwardly
as a form of sacrifice–inwardly it knows it to be permanently
overcome. If you ask HOW religion thus falls on the thorns and
faces death, and in the very act annuls annihilation, I cannot
explain the matter, for it is religion’s secret, and to
understand it you must yourself have been a religious man of the
extremer type.  In our future examples, even of the simplest and
healthiest-minded type of religious consciousness, we shall find
this complex sacrificial constitution, in which a higher
happiness holds a lower unhappiness in check.  In the Louvre
there is a picture, by Guido Reni, of St. Michael with his foot
on Satan’s neck.  The richness of the picture is in large part
due to the fiend’s figure being there.  The richness of its
allegorical meaning also is due to his being there–that is, the
world is all the richer for having a devil in it, SO LONG AS WE
KEEP OUR FOOT UPON HIS NECK.  In the religious consciousness,
that is just the position in which the fiend, the negative or
tragic principle, is found; and for that very reason the
religious consciousness is so rich from the emotional point of
view.[20]  We shall see how in certain men and women it takes on
a monstrously ascetic form.  There are saints who have literally
fed on the negative principle, on humiliation and privation, and
the thought of suffering and death–their souls growing in
happiness just in proportion as their outward state grew more
intolerable.  No other emotion than religious emotion can bring a
man to this peculiar pass.  And it is for that reason that when
we ask our question about the value of religion for human life, I
think we ought to look for the answer among these violenter
examples rather than among those of a more moderate hue.
[20] I owe this allegorical illustration to my lamented colleague
and Friend, Charles Carroll Everett.
Having the phenomenon of our study in its acutest possible form
to start with, we can shade down as much as we please later.  And
if in these cases, repulsive as they are to our ordinary worldly
way of judging, we find ourselves compelled to acknowledge
religion’s value and treat it with respect, it will have proved
in some way its value for life at large.  By subtracting and
toning down extravagances we may thereupon proceed to trace the
boundaries of its legitimate sway.
To be sure, it makes our task difficult to have to deal so muck
with eccentricities and extremes.  “How CAN religion on the whole
be the most important of all human functions,” you may ask, “if
every several manifestation of it in turn have to be corrected
and sobered down and pruned away?”  
Such a thesis seems a paradox impossible to sustain
reasonably–yet I believe that something like it will have to be
our final contention.  That personal attitude which the
individual finds himself impelled to take up towards what he
apprehends to be the divine–and you will remember that this was
our definition–will prove to be both a helpless and a
sacrificial attitude.  That is, we shall have to confess to at
least some amount of dependence on sheer mercy, and to practice
some amount of renunciation, great or small, to save our souls
alive.  The constitution of the world we live in requires it:–
          “Entbehren sollst du! sollst entbehren!
           Das ist der ewige Gesang
           Der jedem an die Ohren klingt,
           Den, unser ganzes Leben lang
           Uns heiser jede Stunde singt.”
For when all is said and done, we are in the end absolutely
dependent on the universe; and into sacrifices and surrenders of
some sort, deliberately looked at and accepted, we are drawn and
pressed as into our only permanent positions of repose.  Now in
those states of mind which fall short of religion, the surrender
is submitted to as an imposition of necessity, and the sacrifice
is undergone at the very best without complaint.  In the
religious life, on the contrary, surrender and sacrifice are
positively espoused:  even unnecessary givings-up are added in
order that the happiness may increase.  Religion thus makes easy
and felicitous what in any case is necessary; and if it be the
only agency that can accomplish this result, its vital importance
as a human faculty stands vindicated beyond dispute.  It becomes
an essential organ of our life, performing a function which no
other portion of our nature can so successfully fulfill.  From
the merely biological point of view, so to call it, this is a
conclusion to which, so far as I can now see, we shall inevitably
be led, and led moreover by following the purely empirical method
of demonstration which I sketched to you in the first lecture. 
Of the farther office of religion as a metaphysical revelation I
will say nothing now.
But to foreshadow the terminus of one’s investigations is one
thing, and to arrive there safely is another.  In the next
lecture, abandoning the extreme generalities which have engrossed
us hitherto, I propose that we begin our actual journey by
addressing ourselves directly to the concrete facts.
Were one asked to characterize the life of religion in the
broadest and most general terms possible, one might say that it
consists of the belief that there is an unseen order, and that
our supreme good lies in harmoniously adjusting ourselves
thereto.  This belief and this adjustment are the religious
attitude in the soul.  I wish during this hour to call your
attention to some of the psychological peculiarities of such an
attitude as this, or belief in an object which we cannot see. 
All our attitudes, moral, practical, or emotional, as well as
religious, are due to the “objects” of our consciousness, the
things which we believe to exist, whether really or ideally,
along with ourselves.  Such objects may be present to our senses,
or they may be present only to our thought.  In either case they
elicit from us a REACTION; and the reaction due to things of
thought is notoriously in many cases as strong as that due to
sensible presences.  It may be even stronger.  The memory of an
insult may make us angrier than the insult did when we received
it.  We are frequently more ashamed of our blunders afterwards
than we were at the moment of making them; and in general our
whole higher prudential and moral life is based on the fact that
material sensations actually present may have a weaker influence
on our action than ideas of remoter facts.
The more concrete objects of most men’s religion, the deities
whom they worship, are known to them only in idea.  It has been
vouchsafed, for example, to very few Christian believers to have
had a sensible vision of their Saviour; though enough appearances
of this sort are on record, by way of miraculous exception, to
merit our attention later.  The whole force of the Christian
religion, therefore, so far as belief in the divine personages
determines the prevalent attitude of the believer, is in general
exerted by the instrumentality of pure ideas, of which nothing in
the individual’s past experience directly serves as a model.
But in addition to these ideas of the more concrete religious
objects, religion is full of abstract objects which prove to have
an equal power.  God’s attributes as such, his holiness, his
justice, his mercy, his absoluteness, his infinity, his
omniscience, his tri-unity, the various mysteries of the
redemptive process, the operation of the sacraments, etc., have
proved fertile wells of inspiring meditation for Christian
believers.[21] We shall see later that the absence of definite
sensible images is positively insisted on by the mystical
authorities in all religions as the sine qua non of a successful
orison, or contemplation of the higher divine truths. Such
contemplations are expected (and abundantly verify the
expectation, as we shall also see) to influence the believer’s
subsequent attitude very powerfully for good.
[21] Example:  “I have had much comfort lately in meditating on
the passages which show the personality of the Holy Ghost, and
his distinctness from the Father and the Son.  It is a subject
that requires searching into to find out, but, when realized,
gives one so much more true and lively a sense of the fullness of
the Godhead, and its work in us and to us, than when only
thinking of the Spirit in its effect on us.”  Augustus Hare: 
Memorials, i. 244, Maria Hare to Lucy H. Hare.
Immanuel Kant held a curious doctrine about such objects of
belief as God, the design of creation, the soul, its freedom, and
the life hereafter.  These things, he said, are properly not
objects of knowledge at all.  Our conceptions always require a
sense-content to work with, and as the words soul,”  “God,"
"immortality,” cover no distinctive sense-content whatever, it
follows that theoretically speaking they are words devoid of any
significance.  Yet strangely enough they have a definite meaning
FOR OUR PRACTICE.  We can act AS IF there were a God; feel AS IF
we were free; consider Nature AS IF she were full of special
designs; lay plans AS IF we were to be immortal; and we find then
that these words do make a genuine difference in our moral life. 
Our faith THAT these unintelligible objects actually exist proves
thus to be a full equivalent in praktischer Hinsicht, as Kant
calls it, or from the point of view of our action, for a
knowledge of WHAT they might be, in case we were permitted
positively to conceive them.  So we have the strange phenomenon,
as Kant assures us, of a mind believing with all its strength in
the real presence of a set of things of no one of which it can
form any notion whatsoever.
My object in thus recalling Kant’s doctrine to your mind is not
to express any opinion as to the accuracy of this particularly
uncouth part of his philosophy, but only to illustrate the
characteristic of human nature which we are considering, by an
example so classical in its exaggeration.  The sentiment of
reality can indeed attach itself so strongly to our object of
belief that our whole life is polarized through and through, so
to speak, by its sense of the existence of the thing believed in,
and yet that thing, for purpose of definite description, can
hardly be said to be present to our mind at all.  It is as if a
bar of iron, without touch or sight, with no representative
faculty whatever, might nevertheless be strongly endowed with an
inner capacity for magnetic feeling; and as if, through the
various arousals of its magnetism by magnets coming and going in
its neighborhood, it might be consciously determined to different
attitudes and tendencies. Such a bar of iron could never give you
an outward description of the agencies that had the power of
stirring it so strongly; yet of their presence, and of their
significance for its life, it would be intensely aware through
every fibre of its being.
It is not only the Ideas of pure Reason as Kant styled them, that
have this power of making us vitally feel presences that we are
impotent articulately to describe.  All sorts of higher
abstractions bring with them the same kind of impalpable appeal. 
Remember those passages from Emerson which I read at my last
lecture.  The whole universe of concrete objects, as we know
them, swims, not only for such a transcendentalist writer, but
for all of us, in a wider and higher universe of abstract ideas,
that lend it its significance.  As time, space, and the ether
soak through all things so (we feel) do abstract and essential
goodness, beauty, strength, significance, justice, soak through
all things good, strong, significant, and just.
Such ideas, and others equally abstract, form the background for
all our facts, the fountain-head of all the possibilities we
conceive of.  They give its “nature,” as we call it, to every
special thing.  Everything we know is “what” it is by sharing in
the nature of one of these abstractions.  We can never look
directly at them, for they are bodiless and featureless and
footless, but we grasp all other things by their means, and in
handling the real world we should be stricken with helplessness
in just so far forth as we might lose these mental objects, these
adjectives and adverbs and predicates and heads of classification
and conception.
This absolute determinability of our mind by abstractions is one
of the cardinal facts in our human constitution. Polarizing and
magnetizing us as they do, we turn towards them and from them, we
seek them, hold them, hate them, bless them, just as if they were
so many concrete beings. And beings they are, beings as real in
the realm which they inhabit as the changing things of sense are
in the realm of space.
Plato gave so brilliant and impressive a defense of this common
human feeling, that the doctrine of the reality of abstract
objects has been known as the platonic theory of ideas ever
since.  Abstract Beauty, for example, is for Plato a perfectly
definite individual being, of which the intellect is aware as of
something additional to all the perishing beauties of the earth. 
"The true order of going,” he says, in the often quoted passage
in his “Banquet,” “is to use the beauties of earth as steps along
which one mounts upwards for the sake of that other Beauty, going
from one to two, and from two to all fair forms, and from fair
forms to fair actions, and from fair actions to fair notions,
until from fair notions, he arrives at the notion of absolute
Beauty, and at last knows what the essence of Beauty is."[22]  In
our last lecture we had a glimpse of the way in which a
platonizing writer like Emerson may treat the abstract divineness
of things, the moral structure of the universe, as a fact worthy
of worship.  In those various churches without a God which to-day
are spreading through the world under the name of ethical
societies, we have a similar worship of the abstract divine, the
moral law believed in as an ultimate object.  “Science” in many
minds is genuinely taking the place of a religion.  Where this is
so, the scientist treats the “Laws of Nature” as objective facts
to be revered.  A brilliant school of interpretation of Greek
mythology would have it that in their origin the Greek gods were
only half-metaphoric personifications of those great spheres of
abstract law and order into which the natural world falls
apart–the sky-sphere, the ocean-sphere, the earth-sphere, and
the like; just as even now we may speak of the smile of the
morning, the kiss of the breeze, or the bite of the cold, without
really meaning that these phenomena of nature actually wear a
human face.[23]
[22] Symposium, Jowett, 1871, i.  527.
[23] Example:  “Nature is always so interesting, under whatever
aspect she shows herself, that when it rains, I seem to see a
beautiful woman weeping.  She appears the more beautiful, the
more afflicted she is.”   B. de St. Pierre.
As regards the origin of the Greek gods, we need not at present
seek an opinion.  But the whole array of our instances leads to a
conclusion something like this:  It is as if there were in the
human consciousness a sense of reality, a feeling of objective
presence, a perception of what we may call “something there,"
more deep and more general than any of the special and particular
"senses” by which the current psychology supposes existent
realities to be originally revealed.  If this were so, we might
suppose the senses to waken our attitudes and conduct as they so
habitually do, by first exciting this sense of reality; but
anything else, any idea, for example, that might similarly excite
it, would have that same prerogative of appearing real which
objects of sense normally possess.  So far as religious
conceptions were able to touch this reality-feeling, they would
be believed in in spite of criticism, even though they might be
so vague and remote as to be almost unimaginable, even though
they might be such non-entities in point of WHATNESS, as Kant
makes the objects of his moral theology to be.
The most curious proofs of the existence of such an
undifferentiated sense of reality as this are found in
experiences of hallucination.  It often happens that an
hallucination is imperfectly developed:  the person affected will
feel a “presence” in the room, definitely localized, facing in
one particular way, real in the most emphatic sense of the word,
often coming suddenly, and as suddenly gone; and yet neither
seen, heard, touched, nor cognized in any of the usual “sensible"
ways.  Let me give you an example of this, before I pass to the
objects with whose presence religion is more peculiarly
concerned.
An intimate friend of mine, one of the keenest intellects I know,
has had several experiences of this sort.  He writes as follows
in response to my inquiries:–<59>
“I have several times within the past few years felt the so-
called ’consciousness of a presence.’  The experiences which I
have in mind are clearly distinguishable from another kind of
experience which I have had very frequently, and which I fancy
many persons would also call the ’consciousness of a presence.’
But the difference for me between the two sets of experience is
as great as the difference between feeling a slight warmth
originating I know not where, and standing in the midst of a
conflagration with all the ordinary senses alert.
“It was about September, 1884, when I had the first experience.
On the previous night I had had, after getting into bed at my
rooms in College, a vivid tactile hallucination of being grasped
by the arm, which made me get up and search the room for an
intruder; but the sense of presence properly so called came on
the next night.  After I had got into bed and blown out the
candle, I lay awake awhile thinking on the previous night’s
experience, when suddenly I FELT something come into the room and
stay close to my bed.  It remained only a minute or two.  I did
not recognize it by any ordinary sense and yet there was a
horribly unpleasant ’sensation’ connected with it.  It stirred
something more at the roots of my being than any ordinary
perception.  The feeling had something of the quality of a very
large tearing vital pain spreading chiefly over the chest, but
within the organism–and yet the feeling was not PAIN so much as
ABHORRENCE.  At all events, something was present with me, and I
knew its presence far more surely than I have ever known the
presence of any fleshly living creature.  I was conscious of its
departure as of its coming:  an almost instantaneously swift
going through the door, and the ’horrible sensation’ disappeared.
“On the third night when I retired my mind was absorbed in some
lectures which I was preparing, and I was still absorbed in these
when I became aware of the actual presence (though not of the
COMING) of the thing that was there the night before, and of the
’horrible sensation.’ I then mentally concentrated all my effort
to charge this ’thing,’ if it was evil to depart, if it was NOT
evil, to tell me who or what it was, and if it could not explain
itself, to go, and that I would compel it <60> to go.  It went
as on the previous night, and my body quickly recovered its
normal state.
“On two other occasions in my life I have had precisely the same
’horrible sensation.’  Once it lasted a full quarter of an hour. 
In all three instances the certainty that there in outward space
there stood SOMETHING was indescribably STRONGER than the
ordinary certainty of companionship when we are in the close
presence of ordinary living people.  The something seemed close
to me, and intensely more real than any ordinary perception.
Although I felt it to be like unto myself so to speak, or finite,
small, and distressful, as it were, I didn’t recognize it as any
individual being or person.”
Of course such an experience as this does not connect itself with
the religious sphere.  Yet it may upon occasion do so; and the
same correspondent informs me that at more than one other
conjuncture he had the sense of presence developed with equal
intensity and abruptness, only then it was filled with a quality
of joy.
“There was not a mere consciousness of something there, but fused
in the central happiness of it, a startling awareness of some
ineffable good.  Not vague either, not like the emotional effect
of some poem, or scene, or blossom, of music, but the sure
knowledge of the close presence of a sort of mighty person, and
after it went, the memory persisted as the one perception of
reality.  Everything else might be a dream, but not that.”
My friend, as it oddly happens, does not interpret these latter
experiences theistically, as signifying the presence of God.  But
it would clearly not have been unnatural to interpret them as a
revelation of the deity’s existence.  When we reach the subject
of mysticism, we shall have much more to say upon this head.
Lest the oddity of these phenomena should disconcert you, I will
venture to read you a couple of similar narratives, much shorter,
merely to show that we are dealing with a well-marked natural
kind of fact.  In the first case, which I <61> take from the
Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, the sense of
presence developed in a few moments into a distinctly
visualized hallucination–but I leave that part of the story out.
“I had read,” the narrator says, “some twenty minutes or so, was
thoroughly absorbed in the book, my mind was perfectly quiet, and
for the time being my friends were quite forgotten, when suddenly
without a moment’s warning my whole being seemed roused to the
highest state of tension or aliveness, and I was aware, with an
intenseness not easily imagined by those who had never
experienced it, that another being or presence was not only in
the room, but quite close to me.  I put my book down, and
although my excitement was great, I felt quite collected, and not
conscious of any sense of fear.  Without changing my position,
and looking straight at the fire, I knew somehow that my friend
A. H. was standing at my left elbow but so far behind me as to be
hidden by the armchair in which I was leaning back.  Moving my
eyes round slightly without otherwise changing my position, the
lower portion of one leg became visible, and I instantly
recognized the gray-blue material of trousers he often wore, but
the stuff appeared semitransparent, reminding me of tobacco smoke
in consistency,"[24]– and hereupon the visual hallucination
came.
[24] Journal of the S. P. R., February, 1895, p. 26.
Another informant writes:–
“Quite early in the night I was awakened. . . . I felt as if I
had been aroused intentionally, and at first thought some one was
breaking into the house. . . . I then turned on my side to go to
sleep again, and immediately felt a consciousness of a presence
in the room, and singular to state, it was not the consciousness
of a live person, but of a spiritual presence.  This may provoke
a smile, but I can only tell you the facts as they occurred to
me.  I do not know how to better describe my sensations than by
simply stating that I felt a consciousness of a spiritual
presence. . . .  I felt also at the same time a strong feeling of
superstitious dread, as if something strange and fearful were
about to happen."[25]
[25] E. Gurney:  Phantasms of the Living, i. 384.
Professor Flournoy of Geneva gives me the following testimony of
a friend of his, a lady, who has the gift of automatic or
involuntary writing:–
“Whenever I practice automatic writing, what makes me feel that
it is not due to a subconscious self is the feeling I always have
of a foreign presence, external to my body.  It is sometimes so
definitely characterized that I could point to its exact
position.  This impression of presence is impossible to describe.
It varies in intensity and clearness according to the personality
from whom the writing professes to come.  If it is some one whom
I love, I feel it immediately, before any writing has come.  My
heart seems to recognize it.”
In an earlier book of mine I have cited at full length a curious
case of presence felt by a blind man.  The presence was that of
the figure of a gray-bearded man dressed in a pepper and salt
suit, squeezing himself under the crack of the door and moving
across the floor of the room towards a sofa.  The blind subject
of this quasi-hallucination is an exceptionally intelligent
reporter.  He is entirely without internal visual imagery and
cannot represent light or colors to himself, and is positive that
his other senses, hearing, etc., were not involved in this false
perception.  It seems to have been an abstract conception rather,
with the feelings of reality and spatial outwardness directly
attached to it–in other words, a fully objectified and
exteriorized IDEA.
Such cases, taken along with others which would be too tedious
for quotation, seem sufficiently to prove the existence in our
mental machinery of a sense of present reality more diffused and
general than that which our special senses yield.  For the
psychologists the tracing of the organic seat of such a feeling
would form a pretty problem–nothing could be more natural than
to connect it with the muscular sense, with the feeling that our
muscles were innervating themselves for action.  Whatsoever thus
innervated our activity, or “made our flesh creep"–our senses
are what do so oftenest–might then appear real and present, even
though it were but an abstract idea.  But with such vague
conjectures we have no concern at present, for our interest lies
with the faculty rather than with its organic seat.
Like all positive affections of consciousness, the sense of
reality has its negative counterpart in the shape of a feeling of
unreality by which persons may be haunted, and of which one
sometimes hears complaint:–
“When I reflect on the fact that I have made my appearance by
accident upon a globe itself whirled through space as the sport
of the catastrophes of the heavens,” says Madame Ackermann; “when
I see myself surrounded by beings as ephemeral and
incomprehensible as I am myself, and all excitedly pursuing pure
chimeras, I experience a strange feeling of being in a dream.  It
seems to me as if I have loved and suffered and that erelong I
shall die, in a dream.  My last word will be, ’I have been
dreaming.’"[26]
[26] Pensees d’un Solitaire, p. 66.
In another lecture we shall see how in morbid melancholy this
sense of the unreality of things may become a carking pain, and
even lead to suicide.
We may now lay it down as certain that in the distinctively
religious sphere of experience, many persons (how many we cannot
tell) possess the objects of their belief, not in the form of
mere conceptions which their intellect accepts as true, but
rather in the form of quasi-sensible realities directly
apprehended.  As his sense of the real presence of these objects
fluctuates, so the believer alternates between warmth and
coldness in his faith.  Other examples will bring this home to
one better than abstract description, so I proceed immediately to
cite some.  The first example is a negative one, deploring the
loss of the sense in question.  I have extracted it from an
account given me by a scientific man of my acquaintance, of his
religious life.  It seems to me to show clearly that the feeling
of reality may be something more like a sensation than an
intellectual operation properly so-called.
“Between twenty and thirty I gradually became more and more
agnostic and irreligious, yet I cannot say that I ever lost that
’indefinite consciousness’ which Herbert Spencer describes so
well, of an Absolute Reality behind phenomena.  For me this
Reality was not the pure Unknowable of Spencer’s philosophy, for
although I had ceased my childish prayers to God, and never
prayed to IT in a formal manner, yet my more recent experience
shows me to have been in a relation to IT which practically was
the same thing as prayer.  Whenever I had any trouble, especially
when I had conflict with other people, either domestically or in
the way of business, or when I was depressed in spirits or
anxious about affairs, I now recognize that I used to fall back
for support upon this curious relation I felt myself to be in to
this fundamental cosmical IT.  It was on my side, or I was on Its
side, however you please to term it, in the particular trouble,
and it always strengthened me and seemed to give me endless
vitality to feel its underlying and supporting presence.  In
fact, it was an unfailing fountain of living justice, truth, and
strength, to which I instinctively turned at times of weakness,
and it always brought me out.  I know now that it was a personal
relation I was in to it, because of late years the power of
communicating with it has left me, and I am conscious of a
perfectly definite loss.  I used never to fail to find it when I
turned to it.  Then came a set of years when sometimes I found
it, and then again I would be wholly unable to make connection
with it.  I remember many occasions on which at night in bed, I
would be unable to get to sleep on account of worry.  I turned
this way and that in the darkness, and groped mentally for the
familiar sense of that higher mind of my mind which had always
seemed to be close at hand as it were, closing the passage, and
yielding support, but there was no electric current.  A blank was
there instead of IT:  I couldn’t find anything.  Now, at the age
of nearly fifty, my power of getting into connection with it has
entirely left me; and I have to confess that a great help has
gone out of my life.  Life has become curiously dead and <65>
indifferent; and I can now see that my old experience was
probably exactly the same thing as the prayers of the orthodox,
only I did not call them by that name.  What I have spoken of as
’It’ was practically not Spencer’s Unknowable, but just my own
instinctive and individual God, whom I relied upon for higher
sympathy, but whom somehow I have lost.”
Nothing is more common in the pages of religious biography than
the way in which seasons of lively and of difficult faith are
described as alternating.  Probably every religious person has
the recollection of particular crisis in which a directer vision
of the truth, a direct perception, perhaps, of a living God’s
existence, swept in and overwhelmed the languor of the more
ordinary belief.  In James Russell Lowell’s correspondence there
is a brief memorandum of an experience of this kind:–
“I had a revelation last Friday evening.  I was at Mary’s, and
happening to say something of the presence of spirits (of whom, I
said, I was often dimly aware), Mr. Putnam entered into an
argument with me on spiritual matters.  As I was speaking, the
whole system rose up before me like a vague destiny looming from
the Abyss.  I never before so clearly felt the Spirit of God in
me and around rue.  The whole room seemed to me full of God.  The
air seemed to waver to and fro with the presence of Something I
knew not what.  I spoke with the calmness and clearness of a
prophet.  I cannot tell you what this revelation was.  I have not
yet studied it enough.  But I shall perfect it one day, and then
you shall hear it and acknowledge its grandeur."[27]
[27] Letters of Lowell, i. 75.
<66> Here is a longer and more developed experience from a
manuscript communication by a clergyman–I take it from
Starbuck’s manuscript collection:–
“I remember the night, and almost the very spot on the hill-top,
where my soul opened out, as it were, into the Infinite, and
there was a rushing together of the two worlds, the inner and the
outer.  It was deep calling unto deep–the deep that my own
struggle had opened up within being answered by the unfathomable
deep without, reaching beyond the stars.  I stood alone with Him
who had made me, and all the beauty of the world, and love, and
sorrow, and even temptation.  I did not seek Him, but felt the
perfect unison of my spirit with His.  The ordinary sense of
things around me faded.  For the moment nothing but an ineffable
joy and exultation remained.  It is impossible fully to describe
the experience.  It was like the effect of some great orchestra
when all the separate notes have melted into one swelling harmony
that leaves the listener conscious of nothing save that his soul
is being wafted upwards, and almost bursting with its own
emotion.  The perfect stillness of the night was thrilled by a
more solemn silence.  The darkness held a presence that was all
the more felt because it was not seen.  I could not any more have
doubted that HE was there than that I was.  Indeed, I felt myself
to be, if possible, the less real of the two.
“My highest faith in God and truest idea of him were then born in
me.  I have stood upon the Mount of Vision since, and felt the
Eternal round about me.  But never since has there come quite the
same stirring of the heart.  Then, if ever, I believe, I stood
face to face with God, and was born anew of his spirit. There
was, as I recall it, no sudden change of thought or of belief,
except that my early crude conception, had, as it were burst into
flower.  There was no destruction of the old, but a rapid,
wonderful unfolding.  Since that time no discussion that I have
heard of the proofs of God’s existence has been able to shake my
faith.  Having once felt the presence of God’s spirit, I have
never lost it again for long.  My most assuring evidence of his
existence is deeply rooted in that hour of vision in the memory
of that supreme experience, and in the conviction, gained from
reading and reflection, that something the same has come to all
who have found God.  I am aware that it may justly be called
mystical.  I am not enough acquainted with philosophy to defend
it from that or any other charge.  I feel that in writing of it I
have overlaid it with words rather than put it clearly to your
thought.  But, such as it is, I have described it as carefully as
I now am able to do.”
Here is another document, even more definite in character, which,
the writer being a Swiss, I translate from the French
original.[28]
[28] I borrow it, with Professor Flournoy’s permission, from his
rich collection of psychological documents.
“I was in perfect health:  we were on our sixth day of tramping,
and in good training.  We had come the day before from Sixt to
Trient by Buet.  I felt neither fatigue, hunger, nor thirst, and
my state of mind was equally healthy.  I had had at Forlaz good
news from home; I was subject to no anxiety, either near or
remote, for we had a good guide, and there was not a shadow of
uncertainty about the road we should follow.  I can best describe
the condition in which I was by calling it a state of
equilibrium.  When all at once I experienced a feeling of being
raised above myself, I felt the presence of God–I tell of the
thing just as I was conscious of it–as if his goodness and his
power were penetrating me altogether.  The throb of emotion was
so violent that I could barely tell the boys to pass on and not
wait for me.  I then sat down on a stone, unable to stand any
longer, and my eyes overflowed with tears.  I thanked God that in
the course of my life he had taught me to know him, that he
sustained my life and took pity both on the insignificant
creature and on the sinner that I was.  I begged him ardently
that my life might be consecrated to the doing of his will.  I
felt his reply, which was that I should do his will from day to
day in humility and poverty, leaving him, the Almighty God, to be
judge of whether I should some time be called to bear witness
more conspicuously.  Then, slowly, the ecstasy left my heart;
that is, I felt that God had withdrawn the communion which he had
granted, and I was able to walk on, but very slowly, so strongly
was I still possessed by the interior emotion. Besides, I had
wept uninterruptedly for several minutes, my eyes were swollen,
and I did not wish my companions to see me.  The state of ecstasy
may have lasted four or five minutes, although it seemed at the
time to last much longer.  My comrades waited for me ten minutes
at the cross of Barine, but I took about twenty-five or thirty
minutes to join them, for as well as I can remember, they said
that I had kept them back for about half an hour.  The impression
had been so profound that in climbing slowly the slope I asked
myself if it were possible that Moses on Sinai could have had a
more intimate communication with God.  I think it well to add
that in this ecstasy of mine God had neither form, color, odor,
nor taste; moreover, that the feeling of his presence was
accompanied with no determinate localization. It was rather as if
my personality had been transformed by the presence of a
SPIRITUAL SPIRIT.  But the more I seek words to express this
intimate intercourse, the more I feel the impossibility of
describing the thing by any of our usual images.  At bottom the
expression most apt to render what I felt is this:  God was
present, though invisible; he fell under no one of my senses, yet
my consciousness perceived him.”
The adjective “mystical” is technically applied, most often. to
states that are of brief duration.  Of course such hours of
rapture as the last two persons describe are mystical
experiences, of which in a later lecture I shall have much to
say.  Meanwhile here is the abridged record of another mystical
or semi-mystical experience, in a mind evidently framed by nature
for ardent piety.  I owe it to Starbuck’s collection.  The lady
who gives the account is the daughter of a man well known in his
time as a writer against Christianity.  The suddenness of her
conversion shows well how native the sense of God’s presence must
be to certain minds.  She relates that she was brought up in
entire ignorance of Christian doctrine, but, when in Germany,
after being talked to by Christian friends, she read the Bible
and prayed, and finally the plan of salvation flashed upon her
like a stream of light.
<69> “To this day,” she writes, “I cannot understand dallying
with religion and the commands of God.  The very instant I heard
my Father’s cry calling unto me, my heart bounded in recognition.
I ran, I stretched forth my arms, I cried aloud, ’Here, here I
am, my Father.’ Oh, happy child, what should I do?  ’Love me,’
answered my God.  ’I do, I do,’ I cried passionately. ’Come unto
me,’ called my Father.  ’I will,’ my heart panted.  Did I stop to
ask a single question?  Not one.  It never occurred to me to ask
whether I was good enough, or to hesitate over my unfitness, or
to find out what I thought of his church, or . . . to wait until
I should be satisfied.  Satisfied! I was satisfied.  Had I not
found my God and my Father?  Did he not love me?  Had he not
called me?  Was there not a Church into which I might enter?  . .
. Since then I have had direct answers to prayer–so significant
as to be almost like talking with God and hearing his answer. 
The idea of God’s reality has never left me for one moment.”
Here is still another case, the writer being a man aged
twenty-seven, in which the experience, probably almost as
characteristic, is less vividly described:–
“I have on a number of occasions felt that I had enjoyed a period
of intimate communion with the divine.  These meetings came
unasked and unexpected, and seemed to consist merely in the
temporary obliteration of the conventionalities which usually
surround and cover my life. . . .  Once it was when from the
summit of a high mountain I looked over a gashed and corrugated
landscape extending to a long convex of ocean that ascended to
the horizon, and again from the same point when I could see
nothing beneath me but a boundless expanse of white cloud, on the
blown surface of which a few high peaks, including the one I was
on, seemed plunging about as if they were dragging their anchors.
What I felt on these occasions was a temporary loss of my own
identity, accompanied by an illumination which revealed to me a
deeper significance than I had been wont to attach to life.  It
is in this that I find my justification for saying that I have
enjoyed communication with God.  Of course the absence of such a
being as this would be chaos. I cannot conceive of life without
its presence.”
Of the more habitual and so to speak chronic sense of God’s
presence the following sample from Professor Starbuck’s
manuscript collection may serve to give an idea.  It is from a
man aged forty-nine–probably thousands of unpretending
Christians would write an almost identical account.
“God is more real to me than any thought or thing or person.  I
feel his presence positively, and the more as I live in closer
harmony with his laws as written in my body and mind.  I feel him
in the sunshine or rain; and awe mingled with a delicious
restfulness most nearly describes my feelings.  I talk to him as
to a companion in prayer and praise, and our communion is
delightful.  He answers me again and again, often in words so
clearly spoken that it seems my outer ear must have carried the
tone, but generally in strong mental impressions.  Usually a text
of Scripture, unfolding some new view of him and his love for me,
and care for my safety.  I could give hundreds of instances, in
school matters, social problems, financial difficulties, etc. 
That he is mine and I am his never leaves me, it is an abiding
joy.  Without it life would be a blank, a desert, a shoreless,
trackless waste.”
I subjoin some more examples from writers of different ages and
sexes.  They are also from Professor Starbuck’s collection, and
their number might be greatly multiplied.  The first is from a
man twenty-seven years old:–
“God is quite real to me.  I talk to him and often get answers.
Thoughts sudden and distinct from any I have been entertaining
come to my mind after asking God for his direction.  Something
over a year ago I was for some weeks in the direst perplexity.
When the trouble first appeared before me I was dazed, but before
long (two or three hours) I could hear distinctly a passage of
Scripture:  ’My grace is sufficient for thee.’  Every time my
thoughts turned to the trouble I could hear this quotation.  I
don’t think I ever doubted the existence of God, or had him drop
out of my consciousness.  God has frequently stepped into my
affairs very perceptibly, and I feel that he directs many little
details all the time.  But on two or three occasions he has
ordered ways for me very contrary to my ambitions and plans.”
Another statement (none the less valuable psychologically for
being so decidedly childish) is that of a boy of seventeen:–
“Sometimes as I go to church, I sit down, join in the service,
and before I go out I feel as if God was with me, right side of
me, singing and reading the Psalms with me. . . . And then again
I feel as if I could sit beside him, and put my arms around him,
kiss him, etc.  When I am taking Holy Communion at the altar, I
try to get with him and generally feel his presence.”
I let a few other cases follow at random:–
“God surrounds me like the physical atmosphere.  He is closer to
me than my own breath.  In him literally I live and move and have
my being."–
“There are times when I seem to stand in his very presence, to
talk with him.  Answers to prayer have come, sometimes direct and
overwhelming in their revelation of his presence and powers. 
There are times when God seems far off, but this is always my own
fault."–
“I have the sense of a presence, strong, and at the same time
soothing, which hovers over me.  Sometimes it seems to enwrap me
with sustaining arms.”
Such is the human ontological imagination, and such is the
convincingness of what it brings to birth.  Unpicturable beings
are realized, and realized with an intensity almost like that of
an hallucination.  They determine our vital attitude as
decisively as the vital attitude of lovers is determined by the
habitual sense, by which each is haunted, of the other being in
the world.  A lover has notoriously this sense of the continuous
being of his idol, even when his attention is addressed to other
matters and he no longer represents her features.  He cannot
forget her; she uninterruptedly affects him through and through. 
I spoke of the convincingness of these feelings of reality, and I
must dwell a moment longer on that point.  They are as convincing
to those who have them as any direct sensible experiences can be,
and they are, as a rule, much more convincing than results
established by mere logic ever are.  One may indeed be entirely
without them; probably more than one of you here present is
without them in any marked degree; but if you do have them, and
have them at all strongly, the probability is that you cannot
help regarding them as genuine perceptions of truth, as
revelations of a kind of reality which no adverse argument,
however unanswerable by you in words, can expel from your belief.
The opinion opposed to mysticism in philosophy is sometimes
spoken of as RATIONALISM.  Rationalism insists that all our
beliefs ought ultimately to find for themselves articulate
grounds.  Such grounds, for rationalism, must consist of four
things:  (1) definitely statable abstract principles; (2)
definite facts of sensation; (3) definite hypotheses based on
such facts; and (4) definite inferences logically drawn.  Vague
impressions of something indefinable have no place in the
rationalistic system, which on its positive side is surely a
splendid intellectual tendency, for not only are all our
philosophies fruits of it, but physical science (amongst other
good things) is its result.
Nevertheless, if we look on man’s whole mental life as it exists,
on the life of men that lies in them apart from their learning
and science, and that they inwardly and privately follow, we have
to confess that the part of it of which rationalism can give an
account is relatively superficial.  It is the part that has the
prestige undoubtedly, for it has the loquacity, it can challenge
you for proofs, and chop logic, and put you down with words.  But
it will fail to convince or convert you all the same, if your
dumb intuitions are opposed to its conclusions.  If you have
intuitions at all, they come from a deeper level of your nature
than the loquacious level which rationalism inhabits.  Your whole
subconscious life, your impulses, your faiths, your needs, your
divinations, have prepared the premises, of which your
consciousness now feels the weight of the result; and something
in you absolutely KNOWS that that result must be truer than any
logic-chopping rationalistic talk, however clever, that may
contradict it.  This inferiority of the rationalistic level in
founding belief is just as manifest when rationalism argues for
religion as when it argues against it.  That vast literature of
proofs of God’s existence drawn from the order of nature, which a
century ago seemed so overwhelmingly convincing, to-day does
little more than gather dust in libraries, for the simple reason
that our generation has ceased to believe in the kind of God it
argued for.  Whatever sort of a being God may be, we KNOW to-day
that he is nevermore that mere external inventor of
"contrivances” intended to make manifest his “glory” in which our
great-grandfathers took such satisfaction, though just how we
know this we cannot possibly make clear by words either to others
or to ourselves.  I defy any of you here fully to account for
your persuasion that if a God exist he must be a more cosmic and
tragic personage than that Being.
The truth is that in the metaphysical and religious sphere,
articulate reasons are cogent for us only when our inarticulate
feelings of reality have already been impressed in favor of the
same conclusion.  Then, indeed, our intuitions and our reason
work together, and great world-ruling systems, like that of the
Buddhist or of the Catholic philosophy, may grow up. Our
impulsive belief is here always what sets up the original body of
truth, and our articulately verbalized philosophy is but its
showy translation into formulas.  The unreasoned and immediate
assurance is the deep thing in us, the reasoned argument is but a
surface exhibition.  Instinct leads, intelligence does but
follow.  If a person feels the presence of a living God after the
fashion shown by my quotations, your critical arguments, be they
never so superior, will vainly set themselves to change his
faith.
Please observe, however, that I do not yet say that it is BETTER
that the subconscious and non-rational should thus hold primacy
in the religious realm.  I confine myself to simply pointing out
that they do so hold it as a matter of fact.
So much for our sense of the reality of the religious objects.
Let me now say a brief word more about the attitudes they
characteristically awaken.
We have already agreed that they are SOLEMN; and we have seen
reason to think that the most distinctive of them is the sort of
joy which may result in extreme cases from absolute
self-surrender.  The sense of the kind of object to which the
surrender is made has much to do with determining the precise
complexion of the joy; and the whole phenomenon is more complex
than any simple formula allows.  In the literature of the
subject, sadness and gladness have each been emphasized in turn. 
The ancient saying that the first maker of the Gods was fear
receives voluminous corroboration from every age of religious
history; but none the less does religious history show the part
which joy has evermore tended to play.  Sometimes the joy has
been primary; sometimes secondary, being the gladness of
deliverance from the fear. This latter state of things, being the
more complex, is also the more complete; and as we proceed, I
think we shall have abundant reason for refusing to leave out
either the sadness or the gladness, if we look at religion with
the breadth of view which it demands.  Stated in the completest
possible terms, a man’s religion involves both moods of
contraction and moods of expansion of his being.  But the
quantitative mixture and order of these moods vary so much from
one age of the world, from one system of thought, and from one
individual to another, that you may insist either on the dread
and the submission, or on the peace and the freedom as the
essence of the matter, and still remain materially within the
limits of the truth.  The constitutionally sombre and the
constitutionally sanguine onlooker are bound to emphasize
opposite aspects of what lies before their eyes.
The constitutionally sombre religious person makes even of his
religious peace a very sober thing.  Danger still hovers in the
air about it.  Flexion and contraction are not wholly checked. 
It were sparrowlike and childish after our deliverance to explode
into twittering laughter and caper-cutting, and utterly to forget
the imminent hawk on bough.  Lie low, rather, lie low; for you
are in the hands of a living God.  In the Book of Job, for
example, the impotence of man and the omnipotence of God is the
exclusive burden of its author’s mind.  “It is as high as heaven;
what canst thou do?–deeper than hell; what canst thou know?”   
There is an astringent relish about the truth of this conviction
which some men can feel, and which for them is as near an
approach as can be made to the feeling of religious joy.
“In Job,” says that coldly truthful writer, the author of Mark
Rutherford, “God reminds us that man is not the measure of his
creation.  The world is immense, constructed on no plan or theory
which the intellect of man can grasp. It is TRANSCENDENT
everywhere.  This is the burden of every verse, and is the secret
if there be one, of the poem.  Sufficient or insufficient, there
is nothing more. . . .  God is great, we know not his ways.  He
takes from us all we have, but yet if we possess our souls in
patience, we MAY pass the valley of the shadow, and come out in
sunlight again.  We may or we may not! . . . What more have we to
say now than God said from the whirlwind over two thousand five
hundred years ago?"[29]
[29] Mark Rutherford’s Deliverance, London, 1885, pp. 196, 198.
If we turn to the sanguine onlooker, on the other hand, we find
that deliverance is felt as incomplete unless the burden be
altogether overcome and the danger forgotten.  Such onlookers
give us definitions that seem to the sombre minds of whom we have
just been speaking to leave out all the solemnity that makes
religious peace so different from merely animal joys.  In the
opinion of some writers an attitude might be called religious,
though no touch were left in it of sacrifice or submission, no
tendency to flexion, no bowing of the head.  Any “habitual and
regulated admiration,” says Professor J. R. Seeley,[30] “is
worthy to be called a religion"; and accordingly he thinks that
our Music, our Science, and our so-called “Civilization,” as
these things are now organized and admiringly believed in, form
the more genuine religions of our time.  Certainly the
unhesitating and unreasoning way in which we feel that we must
inflict our civilization upon “lower” races, by means of
Hotchkiss guns, etc., reminds one of nothing so much as of the
early spirit of Islam spreading its religion by the sword.
[30] In his book (too little read, I fear), Natural Religion, 3d
edition, Boston, 1886, pp. 91, 122.
In my last lecture I quoted to you the ultra-radical opinion of
Mr. Havelock Ellis, that laughter of any sort may be considered a
religious exercise, for it bears witness to the soul’s
emancipation.  I quoted this opinion in order to deny its
adequacy.  But we must now settle our scores more carefully with
this whole optimistic way of thinking.  It is far too complex to
be decided off-hand.  I propose accordingly that we make of
religious optimism the theme of the next two lectures.
If we were to ask the question:  “What is human life’s chief
concern?” one of the answers we should receive would be:  “It is
happiness.”  How to gain, how to keep, how to recover happiness,
is in fact for most men at all times the secret motive of all
they do, and of all they are willing to endure.  The hedonistic
school in ethics deduces the moral life wholly from the
experiences of happiness and unhappiness which different kinds of
conduct bring; and, even more in the religious life than in the
moral life, happiness and unhappiness seem to be the poles round
which the interest revolves. We need not go so far as to say with
the author whom I lately quoted that any persistent enthusiasm
is, as such, religion, nor need we call mere laughter a religious
exercise; but we must admit that any persistent enjoyment may
PRODUCE the sort of religion which consists in a grateful
admiration of the gift of so happy an existence; and we must also
acknowledge that the more complex ways of experiencing religion
are new manners of producing happiness, wonderful inner paths to
a supernatural kind of happiness, when the first gift of natural
existence is unhappy, as it so often proves itself to be.
With such relations between religion and happiness, it is perhaps
not surprising that men come to regard the happiness which a
religious belief affords as a proof of its truth.  If a creed
makes a man feel happy, he almost inevitably adopts it.  Such a
belief ought to be true; therefore it is true–such, rightly or
wrongly, is one of the “immediate inferences” of the religious
logic used by ordinary men.
“The near presence of God’s spirit,” says a German writer,[31]
"may be experienced in its reality–indeed ONLY experienced. And
the mark by which the spirit’s existence and nearness are made
irrefutably clear to those who have ever had the experience is
the utterly incomparable FEELING OF HAPPINESS which is connected
with the nearness, and which is therefore not only a possible and
altogether proper feeling for us to have here below, but is the
best and most indispensable proof of God’s reality.  No other
proof is equally convincing, and therefore happiness is the point
from which every efficacious new theology should start.”
[31] C. Hilty: Gluck, dritter Theil, 1900, p. 18.
In the hour immediately before us, I shall invite you to consider
the simpler kinds of religious happiness, leaving the more
complex sorts to be treated on a later day.
In many persons, happiness is congenital and irreclaimable.
"Cosmic emotion” inevitably takes in them the form of enthusiasm
and freedom.  I speak not only of those who are animally happy. 
I mean those who, when unhappiness is offered or proposed to
them, positively refuse to feel it, as if it were something mean
and wrong.  We find such persons in every age, passionately
flinging themselves upon their sense of the goodness of life, in
spite of the hardships of their own condition, and in spite of
the sinister theologies into which they may he born.  From the
outset their religion is one of union with the divine.  The
heretics who went before the reformation are lavishly accused by
the church writers of antinomian practices, just as the first
Christians were accused of indulgence in orgies by the Romans. 
It is probable that there never has been a century in which the
deliberate refusal to think ill of life has not been idealized by
a sufficient number of persons to form sects, open or secret, who
claimed all natural things to be permitted.  Saint Augustine’s
maxim, Dilige et quod vis fac–if you but love [God], you may do
as you incline–is morally one of the profoundest of
observations, yet it is pregnant, for such persons, with
passports beyond the bounds of conventional morality.  According
to their characters they have been refined or gross; but their
belief has been at all times systematic enough to constitute a
definite religious attitude.  God was for them a giver of
freedom, and the sting of evil was overcome.  Saint Francis and
his immediate disciples were, on the whole, of this company of
spirits, of which there are of course infinite varieties. 
Rousseau in the earlier years of his writing, Diderot, B. de
Saint Pierre, and many of the leaders of the eighteenth century
anti-Christian movement were of this optimistic type. They owed
their influence to a certain authoritativeness in their feeling
that Nature, if you will only trust her sufficiently, is
absolutely good.
It is to be hoped that we all have some friend, perhaps more
often feminine than masculine, and young than old, whose soul is
of this sky-blue tint, whose affinities are rather with flowers
and birds and all enchanting innocencies than with dark human
passions, who can think no ill of man or God, and in whom
religious gladness, being in possession from the outset, needs no
deliverance from any antecedent burden.
“God has two families of children on this earth,” says Francis W.
Newman,[32] “the once-born and the twice-born,” and the once-born
he describes as follows:  “They see God, not as a strict Judge,
not as a Glorious Potentate; but as the animating Spirit of a
beautiful harmonious world, Beneficent and Kind, Merciful as well
as Pure.  The same characters generally have no metaphysical
tendencies:  they do not look back into themselves. Hence they
are not distressed by their own imperfections:  yet it would be
absurd to call them self-righteous; for they hardly think of
themselves AT ALL.  This childlike quality of their nature makes
the opening of religion very happy to them:  for they no more
shrink from God, than a child from an emperor, before whom the
parent trembles:  in fact, they have no vivid conception of ANY
of the qualities in which the severer Majesty of God
consists.[33] He is to them the impersonation of Kindness and
Beauty.  They read his character, not in the disordered world of
man, but in romantic and harmonious nature. Of human sin they
know perhaps little in their own hearts and not very much in the
world; and human suffering does but melt them to tenderness. 
Thus, when they approach God, no inward disturbance ensues; and
without being as yet spiritual, they have a certain complacency
and perhaps romantic sense of excitement in their simple
worship.”
[32] The Soul; its Sorrows and its Aspirations, 3d edition, 1852,
pp. 89, 91.
[33] I once heard a lady describe the pleasure it gave her to
think that she “could always cuddle up to God.”
In the Romish Church such characters find a more congenial soil
to grow in than in Protestantism, whose fashions of feeling have
been set by minds of a decidedly pessimistic order.  But even in
Protestantism they have been abundant enough; and in its recent
"liberal” developments of Unitarianism and latitudinarianism
generally, minds of this order have played and still are playing
leading and constructive parts.  Emerson himself is an admirable
example.  Theodore Parker is another–here are a couple of
characteristic passages from Parker’s correspondence.[34]
[34] John Weiss:  Life of Theodore Parker, i. 152, 32.
“Orthodox scholars say:  ’In the heathen classics you find no
consciousness of sin.’ It is very true–God be thanked for it.
They were conscious of wrath, of cruelty, avarice, drunkenness,
lust, sloth, cowardice, and other actual vices, and struggled and
got rid of the deformities, but they were not conscious of
’enmity against God,’ and didn’t sit down and whine and groan
against non-existent evil.  I have done wrong things enough in my
life, and do them now; I miss the mark, draw bow, and try again. 
But I am not conscious of hating God, or man, or right, or love,
and I know there is much ’health in me’, and in my body, even
now, there dwelleth many a good thing, spite of consumption and
Saint Paul.”  In another letter Parker writes:  “I have swum in
clear sweet waters all my days; and if sometimes they were a
little cold, and the stream ran adverse and something rough, it
was never too strong to be breasted and swum through.  From the
days of earliest boyhood, when I went stumbling through the
grass, . . . up to the gray-bearded manhood of this time, there
is none but has left me honey in the hive of memory that I now
feed on for present delight. When I recall the years . . . I am
filled with a sense of sweetness and wonder that such little
things can make a mortal so exceedingly rich.  But I must confess
that the chiefest of all my delights is still the religious.”
Another good expression of the “once-born" type of consciousness,
developing straight and natural, with no element of morbid
compunction or crisis, is contained in the answer of Dr. Edward
Everett Hale, the eminent Unitarian preacher and writer, to one
of Dr. Starbuck’s circulars.  I quote a part of it:–
“I observe, with profound regret, the religious struggles which
come into many biographies, as if almost essential to the
formation of the hero.  I ought to speak of these, to say that
any man has an advantage, not to be estimated, who is born, as I
was, into a family where the religion is simple and rational; who
is trained in the theory of such a religion, so that he never
knows, for an hour, what these religious or irreligious struggles
are.  I always knew God loved me, and I was always grateful to
him for the world he placed me in.  I always liked to tell him
so, and was always glad to receive his suggestions to me. . . . I
can remember perfectly that when I was coming to manhood, the
half-philosophical novels of the time had a deal to say about the
young men and maidens who were facing the ’problem of life.’ I
had no idea whatever what the problem of life was.  To live with
all my might seemed to me easy; to learn where there was so much
to learn seemed pleasant and almost of course; to lend a hand, if
one had a chance, natural; and if one did this, why, he enjoyed
life because he could not help it, and without proving to himself
that he ought to enjoy it. . . . A child who is early taught that
he is God’s child, that he may live and move and have his being
in God, and that he has, therefore, infinite strength at hand for
the conquering of any difficulty, will take life more easily, and
probably will make more of it, than one who is told that he is
born the child of wrath and wholly incapable of good."[35]
[35] Starbuck:  Psychology of Religion, pp. 305, 306.
One can but recognize in such writers as these the presence of a
temperament organically weighted on the side of cheer and fatally
forbidden to linger, as those of opposite temperament linger,
over the darker aspects of the universe. In some individuals
optimism may become quasi-pathological. The capacity for even a
transient sadness or a momentary humility seems cut off from them
as by a kind of congenital anaesthesia.[36]
[36] “I know not to what physical laws philosophers will some day
refer the feelings of melancholy.  For myself, I find that they
are the most voluptuous of all sensations,” writes Saint Pierre,
and accordingly he devotes a series of sections of his work on
Nature to the Plaisirs de la Ruine, Plaisirs des Tombeaux, Ruines
de la Nature, Plaisirs de la Solitude–each of them more
optimistic than the last.
This finding of a luxury in woe is very common during
adolescence. The truth-telling Marie Bashkirtseff expresses it
well:–
“In his depression and dreadful uninterrupted suffering, I don’t
condemn life.  On the contrary, I like it and find it good.  Can
you believe it?  I find everything good and pleasant, even my
tears, my grief.  I enjoy weeping, I enjoy my despair.  I enjoy
being exasperated and sad.  I feel as if these were so many
diversions, and I love life in spite of them all.  I want to live
on.  It would be cruel to have me die when I am so accommodating.
I cry, I grieve, and at the same time I am pleased–no, not
exactly that–I know not how to express it.  But everything in
life pleases me.  I find everything agreeable, and in the very
midst of my prayers for happiness, I find myself happy at being
miserable.  It is not I who undergo all this–my body weeps and
cries; but something inside of me which is above me is glad of it
all.” [37]   
[37] Journal de Marie Bashkirtseff, i. 67.
The supreme contemporary example of such an inability to feel
evil is of course Walt Whitman.
“His favorite occupation,” writes his disciple, Dr. Bucke “seemed
to be strolling or sauntering about outdoors by himself, looking
at the grass, the trees, the flowers, the vistas of light, the
varying aspects of the sky, and listening to the birds, the
crickets, the tree frogs, and all the hundreds of natural sounds.
It was evident that these things gave him a pleasure far beyond
what they give to ordinary people.  Until I knew the man,"
continues Dr. Bucke, “it had not occurred to me that any one
could derive so much absolute happiness from these things as he
did.  He was very fond of flowers, either wild or cultivated;
liked all sorts.  I think he admired lilacs and sunflowers just
as much as roses.  Perhaps, indeed, no man who ever lived liked
so many things and disliked so few as Walt Whitman.  All natural
objects seemed to have a charm for him.  All sights and sounds
seemed to please him.  He appeared to like (and I believe he did
like) all the men, women, and children he saw (though I never
knew him to say that he liked any one), but each who knew him
felt that he liked him or her, and that he liked others also.  I
never knew him to argue or dispute, and he never spoke about
money.  He always justified, sometimes playfully, sometimes quite
seriously, those who spoke harshly of himself or his writings,
and I often thought he even took pleasure in the opposition of
enemies.  When I first knew [him], I used to think that he
watched himself, and would not allow his tongue to give
expression to fretfulness, antipathy, complaint, and
remonstrance.  It did not occur to me as possible that these
mental states could be absent in him.  After long observation,
however, I satisfied myself that such absence or unconsciousness
was entirely real.  He never spoke deprecatingly of any
nationality or class of men, or time in the world’s history, or
against any trades or occupations–not even against any animals,
insects, or inanimate things, nor any of the laws of nature, nor
any of the results of those laws, such as illness, deformity, and
death.  He never complained or grumbled either at the weather,
pain, illness, or anything else.  He never swore.  He could not
very well, since he never spoke in anger and apparently never was
angry.  He never exhibited fear, and I do not believe he ever
felt it."[38]
[38] R. M. Bucke:  Cosmic consciousness, pp. 182-186, abridged.
Walt Whitman owes his importance in literature to the systematic
expulsion from his writings of all contractile elements.  The
only sentiments he allowed himself to express were of the
expansive order; and he expressed these in the first person, not
as your mere monstrously conceited individual might so express
them, but vicariously for all men, so that a passionate and
mystic ontological emotion suffuses his words, and ends by
persuading the reader that men and women, life and death, and all
things are divinely good.
Thus it has come about that many persons to-day regard Walt
Whitman as the restorer of the eternal natural religion. He has
infected them with his own love of comrades, with his own
gladness that he and they exist.  Societies are actually formed
for his cult; a periodical organ exists for its propagation, in
which the lines of orthodoxy and heterodoxy are already beginning
to be drawn;[39] hymns are written by others in his peculiar
prosody; and he is even explicitly compared with the founder of
the Christian religion, not altogether to the advantage of the
latter.
[39] I refer to The Conservator, edited by Horace Traubel, and
published monthly at Philadelphia.
Whitman is often spoken of as a “pagan.”  The word nowadays means
sometimes the mere natural animal man without a sense of sin;
sometimes it means a Greek or Roman with his own peculiar
religious consciousness.  In neither of these senses does it
fitly define this poet.  He is more than your mere animal man who
has not tasted of the tree of good and evil.  He is aware enough
of sin for a swagger to be present in his indifference towards
it, a conscious pride in his freedom from flexions and
contractions, which your genuine pagan in the first sense of the
word would never show.
 “I could turn and live with animals, they are so placid and
       self-contained,  
  I stand and look at them long and long;
  They do not sweat and whine about their condition.
  They do not lie awake in the dark and weep for their sins.
  Not one is dissatisfied, not one is demented with the mania of

    owning things,
  Not one kneels to another, nor to his kind that lived thousands

     of years ago,
  Not one is respectable or unhappy over the whole earth."[40]
[40] Song of Myself, 32.
No natural pagan could have written these well-known lines.  But
on the other hand Whitman is less than a Greek or Roman; for
their consciousness, even in Homeric times, was full to the brim
of the sad mortality of this sunlit world, and such a
consciousness Walt Whitman resolutely refuses to adopt.  When,
for example, Achilles, about to slay Lycaon, Priam’s young son,
hears him sue for mercy, he stops to say:–
“Ah, friend, thou too must die:  why thus lamentest thou?
Patroclos too is dead, who was better far than thou. . . . Over
me too hang death and forceful fate.  There cometh morn or eve or
some noonday when my life too some man shall take in battle,
whether with spear he smite, or arrow from the string."[41]
[41] Iliad, XXI., E. Myers’s translation.
Then Achilles savagely severs the poor boy’s neck with his sword,
heaves him by the foot into the Scamander, and calls to the
fishes of the river to eat the white fat of Lycaon.  Just as here
the cruelty and the sympathy each ring true, and do not mix or
interfere with one another, so did the Greeks and Romans keep all
their sadnesses and gladnesses unmingled and entire.  Instinctive
good they did not reckon sin; nor had they any such desire to
save the credit of the universe as to make them insist, as so
many of US insist, that what immediately appears as evil must be
"good in the making,” or something equally ingenious.  Good was
good, and bad just bad, for the earlier Greeks.  They neither
denied the ills of nature–Walt Whitman’s verse, “What is called
good is perfect and what is called bad is just as perfect,” would
have been mere silliness to them–nor did they, in order to
escape from those ills, invent “another and a better world” of
the imagination, in which, along with the ills, the innocent
goods of sense would also find no place.  This integrity of the
instinctive reactions, this freedom from all moral sophistry and
strain, gives a pathetic dignity to ancient pagan feeling. And
this quality Whitman’s outpourings have not got. His optimism is
too voluntary and defiant; his gospel has a touch of bravado and
an affected twist,[42] and this diminishes its effect on many
readers who yet are well disposed towards optimism, and on the
whole quite willing to admit that in important respects Whitman
is of the genuine lineage of the prophets.
[42] “God is afraid of me!” remarked such a titanic-optimistic
friend in my presence one morning when he was feeling
particularly hearty and cannibalistic.  The defiance of the
phrase showed that a Christian education in humility still
rankled in his breast.
If, then, we give the name of healthy-mindedness to the tendency
which looks on all things and sees that they are good, we find
that we must distinguish between a more involuntary and a more
voluntary or systematic way of being healthy-minded.  In its
involuntary variety, healthy-mindedness is a way of feeling happy
about things immediately.  In its systematical variety, it is an
abstract way of conceiving things as good.  Every abstract way of
conceiving things selects some one aspect of them as their
essence for the time being, and disregards the other aspects. 
Systematic healthy-mindedness, conceiving good as the essential
and universal aspect of being, deliberately excludes evil from
its field of vision; and although, when thus nakedly stated, this
might seem a difficult feat to perform for one who is
intellectually sincere with himself and honest about facts, a
little reflection shows that the situation is too complex to lie
open to so simple a criticism.
In the first place, happiness, like every other emotional state,
has blindness and insensibility to opposing facts given it as its
instinctive weapon for self-protection against disturbance. When
happiness is actually in possession, the thought of evil can no
more acquire the feeling of reality than the thought of good can
gain reality when melancholy rules.  To the man actively happy,
from whatever cause, evil simply cannot then and there be
believed in.  He must ignore it; and to the bystander he may then
seem perversely to shut his eyes to it and hush it up.
But more than this:  the hushing of it up may, in a perfectly
candid and honest mind, grow into a deliberate religious policy,
or parti pris.  Much of what we call evil is due entirely to the
way men take the phenomenon.  It can so often be converted into a
bracing and tonic good by a simple change of the sufferer’s inner
attitude from one of fear to one of fight; its sting so often
departs and turns into a relish when, after vainly seeking to
shun it, we agree to face about and bear it cheerfully, that a
man is simply bound in honor, with reference to many of the facts
that seem at first to disconcert his peace, to adopt this way of
escape.  Refuse to admit their badness; despise their power;
ignore their presence; turn your attention the other way; and so
far as you yourself are concerned at any rate, though the facts
may still exist, their evil character exists no longer.  Since
you make them evil or good by your own thoughts about them, it is
the ruling of your thoughts which proves to be your principal
concern.
The deliberate adoption of an optimistic turn of mind thus makes
its entrance into philosophy.  And once in, it is hard to trace
its lawful bounds.  Not only does the human instinct for
happiness, bent on self-protection by ignoring, keep working in
its favor, but higher inner ideals have weighty words to say. 
The attitude of unhappiness is not only painful, it is mean and
ugly.  What can be more base and unworthy than the pining,
puling, mumping mood, no matter by what outward ills it may have
been engendered? What is more injurious to others?  What less
helpful as a way out of the difficulty?  It but fastens and
perpetuates the trouble which occasioned it, and increases the
total evil of the situation.  At all costs, then, we ought to
reduce the sway of that mood; we ought to scout it in ourselves
and others, and never show it tolerance.  But it is impossible to
carry on this discipline in the subjective sphere without
zealously emphasizing the brighter and minimizing the darker
aspects of the objective sphere of things at the same time.  And
thus our resolution not to indulge in misery, beginning at a
comparatively small point within ourselves, may not stop until it
has brought the entire frame of reality under a systematic
conception optimistic enough to be congenial with its needs.
In all this I say nothing of any mystical insight or persuasion
that the total frame of things absolutely must be good.  Such
mystical persuasion plays an enormous part in the history of the
religious consciousness, and we must look at it later with some
care.  But we need not go so far at present. More ordinary
non-mystical conditions of rapture suffice for my immediate
contention.  All invasive moral states and passionate enthusiasms
make one feelingless to evil in some direction. The common
penalties cease to deter the patriot, the usual prudences are
flung by the lover to the winds.  When the passion is extreme,
suffering may actually be gloried in, provided it be for the
ideal cause, death may lose its sting, the grave its victory.  In
these states, the ordinary contrast of good and ill seems to be
swallowed up in a higher denomination, an omnipotent excitement
which engulfs the evil, and which the human being welcomes as the
crowning experience of his life.  This, he says, is truly to
live, and I exult in the heroic opportunity and adventure.
The systematic cultivation of healthy-mindedness as a religious
attitude is therefore consonant with important currents in human
nature, and is anything but absurd.  In fact. we all do cultivate
it more or less, even when our professed theology should in
consistency forbid it.  We divert our attention from disease and
death as much as we can; and the slaughter-houses and indecencies
without end on which our life is founded are huddled out of sight
and never mentioned, so that the world we recognize officially in
literature and in society is a poetic fiction far handsomer and
cleaner and better than the world that really is.[43]
[43] “As I go on in this life, day by day, I become more of a
bewildered child; I cannot get used to this world, to
procreation, to heredity, to sight, to hearing, the commonest
things are a burthen. The prim, obliterated, polite surface of
life, and the broad, bawdy and orgiastic–or
maenadic–foundations, form a spectacle to which no habit
reconciles me.  R. L. Stevenson:  Letters, ii. 355.
The advance of liberalism, so-called, in Christianity, during the
past fifty years, may fairly be called a victory of
healthy-mindedness within the church over the morbidness with
which the old hell-fire theology was more harmoniously related. 
We have now whole congregations whose preachers, far from
magnifying our consciousness of sin, seem devoted rather to
making little of it.  They ignore, or even deny, eternal
punishment, and insist on the dignity rather than on the
depravity of man.  They look at the continual preoccupation of
the old-fashioned Christian with the salvation of his soul as
something sickly and reprehensible rather than admirable; and a
sanguine and “muscular” attitude. which to our forefathers would
have seemed purely heathen, has become in their eyes an ideal
element of Christian character. I am not asking whether or not
they are right, I am only pointing out the change.  The persons
to whom I refer have still retained for the most part their
nominal connection with Christianity, in spite of their
discarding of its more pessimistic theological elements.  But in
that “theory of evolution” which, gathering momentum for a
century, has within the past twenty-five years swept so rapidly
over Europe and America, we see the ground laid for a new sort of
religion of Nature, which has entirely displaced Christianity
from the thought of a large part of our generation.  The idea of
a universal evolution lends itself to a doctrine of general
meliorism and progress which fits the religious needs of the
healthy-minded so well that it seems almost as if it might have
been created for their use.  Accordingly we find “evolutionism"
interpreted thus optimistically and embraced as a substitute for
the religion they were born in, by a multitude of our
contemporaries who have either been trained scientifically, or
been fond of reading popular science, and who had already begun
to be inwardly dissatisfied with what seemed to them the
harshness and irrationality of the orthodox Christian scheme.  As
examples are better than descriptions, I will quote a document
received in answer to Professor Starbuck’s circular of questions.
The writer’s state of mind may by courtesy be called a religion,
for it is his reaction on the whole nature of things, it is
systematic and reflective and it loyally binds him to certain
inner ideals.  I think you will recognize in him, coarse-meated
and incapable of wounded spirit as he is, a sufficiently familiar
contemporary type.
Q.  What does Religion mean to you?
A.  It means nothing; and it seems, so far as I can observe
useless to others.  I am sixty-seven years of age and have
resided in X fifty years, and have been in business forty-five,
consequently I have some little experience of life and men, and
some women too, and I find that the most religious and pious
people are as a rule those most lacking in uprightness and
morality.  
The men who do not go to church or have any religious convictions
are the best.  Praying, singing of hymns, and sermonizing are
pernicious–they teach us to rely on some supernatural power,
when we ought to rely on ourselves.  I TEEtotally disbelieve in a
God.  The God-idea was begotten in ignorance, fear, and a general
lack of any knowledge of Nature.  If I were to die now, being in
a healthy condition for my age, both mentally and physically, I
would just as lief, yes, rather, die with a hearty enjoyment of
music, sport, or any other rational pastime. As a timepiece
stops, we die–there being no immortality in either case.
Q.  What comes before your mind corresponding to the words God,
Heaven, Angels, etc?
A.  Nothing whatever.  I am a man without a religion.  These
words mean so much mythic bosh.
Q.  Have you had any experiences which appeared providential?
A.  None whatever.  There is no agency of the superintending
kind.  A little judicious observation as well as knowledge of
scientific law will convince any one of this fact.
Q.  What things work most strongly on your emotions?
A.  Lively songs and music; Pinafore instead of an Oratorio. I
like Scott, Burns, Byron, Longfellow, especially Shakespeare,
etc., etc.  Of songs, the Star-Spangled Banner, America,
Marseillaise, and all moral and soul-stirring songs, but
wishy-washy hymns are my detestation.  I greatly enjoy nature,
especially fine weather, and until within a few years used to
walk Sundays into the country, twelve miles often, with no
fatigue, and bicycle forty or fifty.  I have dropped the bicycle.
I never go to church, but attend lectures when there are any good
ones.  All of my thoughts and cogitations have been of a healthy
and cheerful kind, for instead of doubts and fears I see things
as they are, for I endeavor to adjust myself to my environment. 
This I regard as the deepest law.  Mankind is a progressive
animal.  I am satisfied he will have made a great advance over
his present status a thousand years hence.
Q.  What is your notion of sin?
A.  It seems to me that sin is a condition, a disease, incidental
to man’s development not being yet advanced enough.  Morbidness  
over it increases the disease.  We should think that a million of
years hence equity, justice, and mental and physical good order
will be so fixed and organized that no one will have any idea of
evil or sin.
Q.  What is your temperament?
A.  Nervous, active, wide-awake, mentally and physically. Sorry
that Nature compels us to sleep at all.
If we are in search of a broken and a contrite heart, clearly we
need not look to this brother.  His contentment with the finite
incases him like a lobster-shell and shields him from all morbid
repining at his distance from the infinite.  We have in him an
excellent example of the optimism which may be encouraged by
popular science.
To my mind a current far more important and interesting
religiously than that which sets in from natural science towards
healthy-mindedness is that which has recently poured over America
and seems to be gathering force every day–I am ignorant what
foothold it may yet have acquired in Great Britain–and to which,
for the sake of having a brief designation, I will give the title
of the “Mind-cure movement.”  There are various sects of this
"New Thought,” to use another of the names by which it calls
itself; but their agreements are so profound that their
differences may be neglected for my present purpose, and I will
treat the movement, without apology, as if it were a simple
thing.
It is a deliberately optimistic scheme of life, with both a
speculative and a practical side.  In its gradual development
during the last quarter of a century, it has taken up into itself
a number of contributory elements, and it must now be reckoned
with as a genuine religious power.  It has reached the stage, for
example, when the demand for its literature is great enough for
insincere stuff, mechanically produced for the market, to be to a
certain extent supplied by publishers–a phenomenon never
observed, I imagine, until a religion has got well past its
earliest insecure beginnings.
One of the doctrinal sources of Mind-cure is the four Gospels;
another is Emersonianism or New England transcendentalism;
another is Berkeleyan idealism; another is spiritism, with its
messages of “law” and “progress” and “development"; another the
optimistic popular science evolutionism of which I have recently
spoken; and, finally, Hinduism has contributed a strain.  But the
most characteristic feature of the mind-cure movement is an
inspiration much more direct.  The leaders in this faith have had
an intuitive belief in the all-saving power of healthy-minded
attitudes as such, in the conquering efficacy of courage, hope,
and trust, and a correlative contempt for doubt, fear, worry, and
all nervously precautionary states of mind.[44] Their belief has
in a general way been corroborated by the practical experience of
their disciples; and this experience forms to-day a mass imposing
in amount.
[44] “Cautionary Verses for Children”:  this title of a much used
work, published early in the nineteenth century, shows how far
the muse of evangelical protestantism in England, with her mind
fixed on the idea of danger, had at last drifted away from the
original gospel freedom.  Mind-cure might be briefly called a
reaction against all that religion of chronic anxiety which
marked the earlier part of our century in the evangelical circles
of England and America.
The blind have been made to see, the halt to walk; life-long
invalids have had their health restored.  The moral fruits have
been no less remarkable.  The deliberate adoption of a
healthy-minded attitude has proved possible to many who never
supposed they had it in them; regeneration of character has gone
on on an extensive scale; and cheerfulness has been restored to
countless homes.  The indirect influence of this has been great. 
The mind-cure principles are beginning so to pervade the air that
one catches their spirit at second-hand.  One hears of the
"Gospel of Relaxation,” of the “Don’t Worry Movement,” of people
who repeat to themselves, “Youth, health, vigor!” when dressing
in the morning, as their motto for the day.  
Complaints of the weather are getting to be forbidden in many
households; and more and more people are recognizing it to be bad
form to speak of disagreeable sensations, or to make much of the
ordinary inconveniences and ailments of life.  These general
tonic effects on public opinion would be good even if the more
striking results were non-existent.  But the latter abound so
that we can afford to overlook the innumerable failures and
self-deceptions that are mixed in with them (for in everything
human failure is a matter of course), and we can also overlook
the verbiage of a good deal of the mind-cure literature, some of
which is so moonstruck with optimism and so vaguely expressed
that an academically trained intellect finds it almost impossible
to read it at all.
The plain fact remains that the spread of the movement has been
due to practical fruits, and the extremely practical turn of
character of the American people has never been better shown than
by the fact that this, their only decidedly original contribution
to the systematic philosophy of life, should be so intimately
knit up with concrete therapeutics.  To the importance of
mind-cure the medical and clerical professions in the United
States are beginning, though with much recalcitrancy and
protesting, to open their eyes.  It is evidently bound to develop
still farther, both speculatively and practically, and its latest
writers are far and away the ablest of the group.[45] It matters
nothing that, just as there are hosts of persons who cannot pray,
so there are greater hosts who cannot by any possibility be
influenced by the mind-curers’ ideas.  For our immediate purpose,
the important point is that so large a number should exist who 
CAN be so influenced.  They form a psychic type to be studied
with respect.[46]
[45] I refer to Mr. Horatio W. Dresser and Mr. Henry Wood,
especially the former.  Mr. Dresser’s works are published by G. 
P. Putnam’s Sons, New York and London; Mr. Wood’s by Lee &
Shepard Boston.
[46] Lest my own testimony be suspected, I will quote another
reporter, Dr. H. H. Goddard, of Clark University, whose thesis on
"the Effects of Mind on Body as evidenced by Faith Cures” is
published in the American Journal of Psychology for 1899 (vol.
x.).  This critic, after a wide study of the facts, concludes
that the cures by mind-cure exist, but are in no respect
different from those now officially recognized in medicine as
cures by suggestion; and the end of his essay contains an
interesting physiological speculation as to the way in which the
suggestive ideas may work (p. 67 of the reprint).  As regards the
general phenomenon of mental cure itself, Dr. Goddard writes: 
"In spite of the severe criticism we have made of reports of
cure, there still remains a vast amount of material, showing a
powerful influence of the mind in disease.  Many cases are of
diseases that have been diagnosed and treated by the best
physicians of the country, or which prominent hospitals have
tried their hand at curing, but without success.  People of
culture and education have been treated by this method with
satisfactory results.  Diseases of long standing have been
ameliorated, and even cured. . . . We have traced the mental
element through primitive medicine and folk-medicine of to-day,
patent medicine, and witchcraft.  We are convinced that it is
impossible to account for the existence of these practices, if
they did not cure disease, and that if they cured disease, it
must have been the mental element that was effective.  The same
argument applies to those modern schools of mental therapeutics–
Divine Healing and Christian Science.  It is hardly conceivable
that the large body of intelligent people who comprise the body
known distinctively as Mental Scientists should continue to exist
if the whole thing were a delusion.  It is not a thing of a day;
it is not confined to a few; it is not local.  It is true that
many failures are recorded, but that only adds to the argument. 
There must be many and striking successes to counterbalance the
failures, otherwise the failures would have ended the delusion. .
. . Christian Science, Divine Healing, or Mental Science do not,
and never can in the very nature of things, cure all diseases;
nevertheless, the practical applications of the general
principles of the broadest mental science will tend to prevent
disease. . . . We do find sufficient evidence to convince us
that the proper reform in mental attitude would relieve many a
sufferer of ills that the ordinary physician cannot touch; would
even delay the approach of death to many a victim beyond the
power of absolute cure, and the faithful adherence to a truer
philosophy of life will keep many a man well, and give the doctor
time to devote to alleviating ills that are unpreventable” (pp.
33, 34 of reprint).
To come now to a little closer quarters with their creed.  The
fundamental pillar on which it rests is nothing more than the
general basis of all religious experience, the fact that man has
a dual nature, and is connected with two spheres of thought, a
shallower and a profounder sphere, in either of which he may
learn to live more habitually.  The shallower and lower sphere is
that of the fleshly sensations, instincts, and desires, of
egotism, doubt, and the lower personal interests.  But whereas
Christian theology has always considered FROWARDNESS to be the
essential vice of this part of human nature, the mind-curers say
that the mark of the beast in it is FEAR; and this is what gives
such an entirely new religious turn to their persuasion.
“Fear,” to quote a writer of the school, “has had its uses in the
evolutionary process, and seems to constitute the whole of
forethought in most animals; but that it should remain any part
of the mental equipment of human civilized life is an absurdity. 
I find that the fear clement of forethought is not stimulating to
those more civilized persons to whom duty and attraction are the
natural motives, but is weakening and deterrent.  As soon as it
becomes unnecessary, fear becomes a positive deterrent, and
should be entirely removed, as dead flesh is removed from living
tissue.  To assist in the analysis of fear and in the
denunciation of its expressions, I have coined the word
fearthought to stand for the unprofitable element of forethought,
and have defined the word ’worry’ as fearthought in
contradistinction to forethought.  I have also defined
fearthought as the self-imposed or self-permitted suggestion of
inferiority, in order to place it where it really belongs, in the
category of harmful, unnecessary, and therefore not respectable
things."[47]
[47] Horace Fletcher:  Happiness as found in Forethought Minus
Fearthought, Menticulture Series, ii.  Chicago and New York,
Stone. 1897, pp. 21-25, abridged.
The “misery-habit,” the “martyr-habit,” engendered by the
prevalent “fearthought,” get pungent criticism from the mind-cure
writers:–
“Consider for a moment the habits of life into which we are born.
There are certain social conventions or customs and alleged
requirements, there is a theological bias, a general view of the
world.  There are conservative ideas in regard to our early
training, our education, marriage, and occupation in life.
Following close upon this, there is a long series of
anticipations, namely, that we shall suffer certain children’s
diseases, diseases of middle life, and of old age; the thought
that we shall grow old, lose our faculties, and again become
childlike; while crowning all is the fear of death.  Then there
is a long line of particular tears and trouble-bearing
expectations, such, for example, as ideas associated with certain
articles of food, the dread of the east wind, the terrors of hot
weather, the aches and pains associated with cold weather, the
fear of catching cold if one sits in a draught, the coming of
hay-fever upon the 14th of August in the middle of the day, and
so on through a long list of fears, dreads, worriments,
anxieties, anticipations, expectations, pessimisms, morbidities,
and the whole ghostly train of fateful shapes which our
fellow-men, and especially physicians, are ready to help us
conjure up, an array worthy to rank with Bradley’s ’unearthly
ballet of bloodless categories.’
“Yet this is not all.  This vast array is swelled by innumerable
volunteers from daily life–the fear of accident, the possibility
of calamity, the loss of property, the chance of robbery, of
fire, or the outbreak of war.  And it is not deemed sufficient to
fear for ourselves.  When a friend is taken ill, we must forth
with fear the worst and apprehend death.  If one meets with
sorrow . . . sympathy means to enter into and increase the
suffering."[48]
[48] H. W. Dresser:  Voices of Freedom, New York, 1899, p. 38.
“Man,” to quote another writer, “often has fear stamped upon him
before his entrance into the outer world; he is reared in fear;
all his life is passed in bondage to fear of disease and death,
and thus his whole mentality becomes cramped, limited, and
depressed, and his body follows its shrunken pattern and
specification . . . Think of the millions of sensitive and
responsive souls among our ancestors who have been under the
dominion of such a perpetual nightmare! Is it not surprising that
health exists at all?  Nothing but the boundless divine love?
exuberance, and vitality, constantly poured in, even though
unconsciously to us, could in some degree neutralize such an
ocean of morbidity."[49]
[49] Henry Wood:  Ideal Suggestion through Mental Photography.
Boston, 1899, p. 54.
Although the disciples of the mind-cure often use Christian
terminology, one sees from such quotations how widely their
notion of the fall of man diverges from that of ordinary
Christians.[50]
[50] Whether it differs so much from Christ’s own notion is for
the exegetists to decide.  According to Harnack, Jesus felt about
evil and disease much as our mind-curers do.  “What is the answer
which Jesus sends to John the Baptist?” asks Harnack, and says it
is this:  “’The blind see, and the lame walk, the lepers are
cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead rise up, and the gospel is
preached to the poor.’  That is the ’coming of the kingdom,’ or
rather in these saving works the kingdom is already there.  By
the overcoming and removal of misery, of need, of sickness, by
these actual effects John is to see that the new time has
arrived.  The casting out of devils is only a part of this work
of redemption, but Jesus points to that as the sense and seal of
his mission.  Thus to the wretched, sick, and poor did he address
himself, but not as a moralist, and without a trace of
sentimentalism.  He never makes groups and departments of the
ills, he never spends time in asking whether the sick one
’deserves’ to be cured; and it never occurs to him to sympathize
with the pain or the death.  He nowhere says that sickness is a
beneficent infliction, and that evil has a healthy use.  No, he
calls sickness sickness and health health.  All evil, all
wretchedness, is for him something dreadful; it is of the great
kingdom of Satan; but he feels the power of the saviour within
him.  He knows that advance is possible only when weakness is
overcome, when sickness is made well.”  Das Wesen des
Christenthums, 1900, p. 39.
Their notion of man’s higher nature is hardly less divergent,
being decidedly pantheistic.  The spiritual in man appears 
in the mind-cure philosophy as partly conscious, but chiefly
subconscious; and through the subconscious part of it we are
already one with the Divine without any miracle of grace, or
abrupt creation of a new inner man.  As this view is variously
expressed by different writers, we find in it traces of Christian
mysticism, of transcendental idealism, of vedantism, and of the
modern psychology of the subliminal self.  A quotation or two
will put us at the central point of view:–
“The great central fact of the universe is that spirit of
infinite life and power that is back of all, that manifests
itself in and through all.  This spirit of infinite life and
power that is back of all is what I call God.  I care not what
term you may use, be it Kindly Light, Providence, the Over-Soul,
Omnipotence, or whatever term may be most convenient, so long as
we are agreed in regard to the great central fact itself.  God
then fills the universe alone, so that all is from Him and in
Him, and there is nothing that is outside.  He is the life of our
life our very life itself.  We are partakers of the life of God;
and though we differ from Him in that we are individualized
spirits, while He is the Infinite Spirit, including us, as well
as all else beside, yet in essence the life of God and the life
of man are identically the same, and so are one.  They differ not
in essence or quality; they differ in degree.
“The great central fact in human life is the coming into a
conscious vital realization of our oneness with this Infinite
Life and the opening of ourselves fully to this divine inflow. 
In just the degree that we come into a conscious realization of
our oneness with the Infinite Life, and open ourselves to this
divine inflow, do we actualize in ourselves the qualities and
powers of the Infinite Life, do we make ourselves channels
through which the Infinite Intelligence and Power can work.  In
just the degree in which you realize your oneness with the
Infinite Spirit, you will exchange dis-ease for ease, inharmony
for harmony, suffering and pain for abounding health and
strength.  To recognize our own divinity, and our intimate
relation to the Universal, is to attach the belts of our
machinery to the powerhouse of the Universe.  One need remain in
hell no longer than one chooses to; we can rise to any heaven we
ourselves choose; and when we choose so to rise, all the higher
powers of the Universe combine to help us heavenward."[51]
[51] R. W. Trine:  In Tune with the Infinite, 26th thousand, N.Y.
1899.  I have strung scattered passages together.
Let me now pass from these abstracter statements to some more
concrete accounts of experience with the mind-cure religion.  I
have many answers from correspondents–the only difficulty is to
choose.  The first two whom I shall quote are my personal
friends.  One of them, a woman, writing as follows, expresses
well the feeling of continuity with the Infinite Power, by which
all mind-cure disciples are inspired.
“The first underlying cause of all sickness, weakness, or
depression is the human sense of separateness from that Divine
Energy which we call God.  The soul which can feel and affirm in
serene but jubilant confidence, as did the Nazarene:  ’I and my
Father are one,’ has no further need of healer, or of healing.
This is the whole truth in a nutshell, and other foundation for
wholeness can no man lay than this fact of impregnable divine
union.  Disease can no longer attack one whose feet are planted
on this rock, who feels hourly, momently, the influx of the
Deific Breath.  If one with Omnipotence, how can weariness enter
the consciousness, how illness assail that indomitable spark?
“This possibility of annulling forever the law of fatigue has
been abundantly proven in my own case; for my earlier life bears
a record of many, many years of bedridden invalidism, with spine
and lower limbs paralyzed.  My thoughts were no more impure than
they are to-day, although my belief in the necessity of illness
was dense and unenlightened; but since my resurrection in the
flesh, I have worked as a healer unceasingly for fourteen years
without a vacation, and can truthfully assert that I have never
known a moment of fatigue or pain, although coming in touch
constantly with excessive weakness, illness, and disease of all
kinds.  For how can a conscious part of Deity be sick?–since
’Greater is he that is with us than all that can strive against
us.’”
My second correspondent, also a woman, sends me the following
statement:–
“Life seemed difficult to me at one time.  I was always breaking
down, and had several attacks of what is called nervous
prostration, with terrible insomnia, being on the verge of
insanity; besides having many other troubles, especially of the
digestive organs.  I had been sent away from home in charge of
doctors, had taken all the narcotics, stopped all work, been fed
up, and in fact knew all the doctors within reach.  But I never
recovered permanently till this New Thought took possession of
me.
“I think that the one thing which impressed me most was learning
the fact that we must be in absolutely constant relation or
mental touch (this word is to me very expressive) with that
essence of life which permeates all and which we call God. This
is almost unrecognizable unless we live it into ourselves
ACTUALLY, that is, by a constant turning to the very innermost,
deepest consciousness of our real selves or of God in us, for
illumination from within, just as we turn to the sun for light,
warmth, and invigoration without.  When you do this consciously,
realizing that to turn inward to the light within you is to live
in the presence of God or your divine self, you soon discover the
unreality of the objects to which you have hitherto been turning
and which have engrossed you without.
“I have come to disregard the meaning of this attitude for bodily
health AS SUCH, because that comes of itself, as an incidental
result, and cannot be found by any special mental act or desire
to have it, beyond that general attitude of mind I have referred
to above.  That which we usually make the object of life, those
outer things we are all so wildly seeking, which we so often live
and die for, but which then do not give us peace and happiness,
they should all come of themselves as accessory, and as the mere
outcome or natural result of a far higher life sunk deep in the
bosom of the spirit.  This life is the real seeking of the
kingdom of God, the desire for his supremacy in our hearts, so
that all else comes as that which shall be ’added unto you’–as
quite incidental and as a surprise to us, perhaps; and yet it is
the proof of the reality of the perfect poise in the very centre
of our being.
“When I say that we commonly make the object of our life that
which we should not work for primarily, I mean many things which
the world considers praiseworthy and excellent, such as success
in business, fame as author or artist, physician or lawyer, or
renown in philanthropic undertakings.  Such things should be
results, not objects.  I would also include pleasures of many
kinds which seem harmless and good at the time, and are pursued
because many accept them–I mean conventionalities,
sociabilities, and fashions in their various development, these
being mostly approved by the masses, although they may be unreal,
and even unhealthy superfluities.”
Here is another case, more concrete, also that of a woman. I read
you these cases without comment–they express so many varieties
of the state of mind we are studying.
“I had been a sufferer from my childhood till my fortieth year. 
[Details of ill-health are given which I omit.] I had been in
Vermont several months hoping for good from the change of air,
but steadily growing weaker, when one day during the latter part
of October, while resting in the afternoon, I suddenly heard as
it were these words:  ’You will be healed and do a work you never
dreamed of.’  These words were impressed upon my mind with such
power I said at once that only God could have put them there.  I
believed them in spite of myself and of my suffering and
weakness, which continued until Christmas, when I returned to
Boston.  Within two days a young friend offered to take me to a
mental healer (this was January 7, 1881).  The healer said: 
’There is nothing but Mind; we are expressions of the One Mind;
body is only a mortal belief; as a man thinketh so is he.’ I
could not accept all she said, but I translated all that was
there for ME in this way:  ’There is nothing but God; I am
created by Him, and am absolutely dependent upon Him; mind is
given me to use; and by just so much of it as I will put upon the
thought of right action in body I  shall be lifted out of bondage
to my ignorance and fear and past experience.’  That day I
commenced accordingly to take a little of every food provided for
the family, constantly saying to myself:  ’The Power that created
the stomach must take care of what I have eaten.’  By holding
these suggestions through the evening I went to bed and fell
asleep, saying:  ’I am soul, spirit, just one with God’s Thought
of me,’ and slept all night without waking, for the first time in
several years [the distress-turns had usually recurred about two
o’clock in the night].  I felt the next day like an escaped
prisoner, and believed I had found the secret that would in time
give me perfect health.  Within ten days I was able to eat
anything provided for others, and after two weeks I began to have
my own positive mental suggestions of Truth, which were to me
like stepping-stones.  I will note a few of them, they came about
two weeks apart.
“1st.  I am Soul, therefore it is well with me.
“2d.  I am Soul, therefore I am well.
“3d.  A sort of inner vision of myself as a four-footed beast
with a protuberance on every part of my body where I had
suffering, with my own face, begging me to acknowledge it as
myself.  I resolutely fixed my attention on being well, and
refused to even look at my old self in this form.
“4th.  Again the vision of the beast far in the background, with
faint voice.  Again refusal to acknowledge.
“5th.  Once more the vision, but only of my eyes with the longing
look; and again the refusal.  Then came the conviction, the inner
consciousness, that I was perfectly well and always had been, for
I was Soul, an expression of God’s Perfect Thought.  That was to
me the perfect and completed separation between what I was and
what I appeared to be.  I succeeded in never losing sight after
this of my real being, by constantly affirming this truth, and by
degrees (though it took me two years of hard work to get there) I
expressed health continuously throughout my whole body.
“In my subsequent nineteen years’ experience I have never known
this Truth to fail when I applied it, though in my ignorance I
have often failed to apply it, but through my failures I have
learned the simplicity and trustfulness of the little child.”
But I fear that I risk tiring you by so many examples, and I must
lead you back to philosophic generalities again.  You see already
by such records of experience how impossible it is not to class
mind-cure as primarily a religious movement.  Its doctrine of the
oneness of our life with God’s life is in fact quite
indistinguishable from an interpretation of Christ’s message
which in these very Gifford lectures has been defended by some of
your very ablest Scottish religious philosophers.[52]
[52] The Cairds, for example.  In Edward Caird’s Glasgow Lectures
of 1890-92 passages like this abound:–
“The declaration made in the beginning of the ministry of Jesus
that ’the time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of heaven is at
hand,’ passes with scarce a break into the announcement that ’the
kingdom of God is among you’; and the importance of this
announcement is asserted to be such that it makes, so to speak, a
difference IN KIND between the greatest saints and prophets who
lived under the previous reign of division, and ’the least in the
kingdom of heaven.’  The highest ideal is brought close to men
and declared to be within their reach, they are called on to be
’perfect as their Father in heaven is perfect.’  The sense of
alienation and distance from God which had grown upon the pious
in Israel just in proportion as they had learned to look upon Him
as no mere national divinity, but as a God of justice who would
punish Israel for its sin as certainly as Edom or Moab, is
declared to be no longer in place; and the typical form of
Christian prayer points to the abolition of the contrast between
this world and the next which through all the history of the Jews
had continually been growing wider:  ’As in heaven, so on earth.’
The sense of the division of man from God, as a finite being from
the Infinite, as weak and sinful from the Omnipotent Goodness, is
not indeed lost; but it can no longer overpower the consciousness
of oneness.  The terms ’Son’ and ’Father’ at once state the
opposition and mark its limit.  They show that it is not an
absolute opposition, but one which presupposes an indestructible
principle of unity, that can and must become a principle of
reconciliation.” The Evolution of Religion, ii.  pp. 146, 147.
But philosophers usually profess to give a quasi-logical
explanation of the existence of evil, whereas of the general fact
of evil in the world, the existence of the selfish, suffering, 
timorous finite consciousness, the mind-curers, so far as I am
acquainted with them, profess to give no speculative explanation
Evil is empirically there for them as it is for everybody, but
the practical point of view predominates, and it would ill agree
with the spirit of their system to spend time in worrying over it
as a “mystery” or “problem,” or in “laying to heart” the lesson
of its experience, after the manner of the Evangelicals.  Don’t
reason about it, as Dante says, but give a glance and pass
beyond!  It is Avidhya, ignorance! something merely to be
outgrown and left be hind, transcended and forgotten.  Christian
Science so-called, the sect of Mrs. Eddy, is the most radical
branch of mind-cure in its dealings with evil.  For it evil is
simply a LIE, and any one who mentions it is a liar.  The
optimistic ideal of duty forbids us to pay it the compliment even
of explicit attention.  Of course, as our next lectures will show
us, this is a bad speculative omission, but it is intimately
linked with the practical merits of the system we are examining. 
Why regret a philosophy of evil, a mind-curer would ask us, if I
can put you in possession of a life of good?
After all, it is the life that tells; and mind-cure has developed
a living system of mental hygiene which may well claim to have
thrown all previous literature of the Diatetit der Seele into the
shade.  This system is wholly and exclusively compacted of
optimism:  “Pessimism leads to weakness. Optimism leads to
power.”    “Thoughts are things,” as one of the most vigorous
mind-cure writers prints in bold type at the bottom of each of
his pages; and if your thoughts are of health, youth, vigor, and
success, before you know it these things will also be your
outward portion.  No one can fail of the regenerative influence
of optimistic thinking, pertinaciously pursued.  Every man owns
indefeasibly this inlet to the divine.  Fear, on the contrary,
and all the contracted and egoistic modes of thought, are inlets
to destruction.  Most mind-curers here bring in a doctrine that
thoughts are “forces,” and that, by virtue of a law that like
attracts like, one man’s thoughts draw to themselves as allies
all the thoughts of the same character that exist the world over.
Thus one gets, by one’s thinking, reinforcements from elsewhere
for the realization of one’s desires; and the great point in the
conduct of life is to get the heavenly forces on one’s side by
opening one’s own mind to their influx.
On the whole, one is struck by a psychological similarity between
the mind-cure movement and the Lutheran and Wesleyan movements. 
To the believer in moralism and works, with his anxious query,
"What shall I do to be saved?”  Luther and Wesley replied:  “You
are saved now, if you would but believe it.”  And the mind-curers
come with precisely similar words of emancipation.  They speak,
it is true, to persons for whom the conception of salvation has
lost its ancient theological meaning, but who labor nevertheless
with the same eternal human difficulty.  THINGS ARE WRONG WITH
THEM; and “What shall I do to be clear, right, sound, whole,
well?” is the form of their question.  And the answer is:  “You
ARE well, sound, and clear already, if you did but know it.” 
"The whole matter may be summed up in one sentence,” says one of
the authors whom I have already quoted, “GOD IS WELL, AND SO ARE
YOU.  You must awaken to the knowledge of your real being.”
The adequacy of their message to the mental needs of a large
fraction of mankind is what gave force to those earlier gospels. 
Exactly the same adequacy holds in the case of the mind-cure
message, foolish as it may sound upon its surface; and seeing its
rapid growth in influence, and its therapeutic triumphs, one is
tempted to ask whether it may not be destined (probably by very
reason of the crudity and extravagance of many of its
manifestations[53]) to play a part almost  as great in the
evolution of the popular religion of the future as did those
earlier movements in their day.
[53] It remains to be seen whether the school of Mr. Dresser,
which assumes more and more the form of mind-cure experience and
academic philosophy mutually impregnating each other, will score
the practical triumphs of the less critical and rational sects.
But I here fear that I may begin to “jar upon the nerves” of some
of the members of this academic audience.  Such contemporary
vagaries, you may think, should hardly take so large a place in
dignified Gifford lectures.  I can only beseech you to have
patience.  The whole outcome of these lectures will, I imagine,
be the emphasizing to your mind of the enormous diversities which
the spiritual lives of different men exhibit.  Their wants, their
susceptibilities, and their capacities all vary and must be
classed under different heads.  The result is that we have really
different types of religious experience; and, seeking in these
lectures closer acquaintance with the healthy-minded type, we
must take it where we find it in most radical form.  The
psychology of individual types of character has hardly begun even
to be sketched as yet–our lectures may possibly serve as a
crumb-like contribution to the structure.  The first thing to
bear in mind (especially if we ourselves belong to the
clerico-academic-scientific type, the officially and
conventionally “correct" type, “the deadly respectable" type, for
which to ignore others is a besetting temptation) is that nothing
can be more stupid than to bar out phenomena from our notice,
merely because we are incapable of taking part in anything like
them ourselves.
Now the history of Lutheran salvation by faith, of methodistic
conversions, and of what I call the mind-cure movement seems to
prove the existence of numerous persons in whom–at any rate at a
certain stage in their development–a change of character for the
better, so far from being facilitated by the rules laid down by
official moralists, will take place all the more successfully if
those rules be exactly reversed.  Official moralists advise us
never to relax our strenuousness.  “Be vigilant, day and night,"
they adjure us; “hold your passive tendencies in check; shrink
from no effort; keep your will like a bow always bent.”  But the
persons I speak of find that all this conscious effort leads to
nothing but failure and vexation in their hands, and only makes
them twofold more the children of hell they were before.  The
tense and voluntary attitude becomes in them an impossible fever
and torment.  Their machinery refuses to run at all when the
bearings are made so hot and the belts so tight.
Under these circumstances the way to success, as vouched for by
innumerable authentic personal narrations, is by an
anti-moralistic method, by the “surrender” of which I spoke in my
second lecture.  Passivity, not activity; relaxation, not
intentness, should be now the rule.  Give up the feeling of
responsibility, let go your hold, resign the care of your destiny
to higher powers, be genuinely indifferent as to what becomes of
it all, and you will find not only that you gain a perfect inward
relief, but often also, in addition, the particular goods you
sincerely thought you were renouncing. This is the salvation
through self-despair, the dying to be truly born, of Lutheran
theology, the passage into NOTHING of which Jacob Behmen writes. 
To get to it, a critical point must usually be passed, a corner
turned within one.  Something must give way, a native hardness
must break down and liquefy; and this event (as we shall
abundantly see hereafter) is frequently sudden and automatic, and
leaves on the Subject an impression that he has been wrought on
by an external power.
Whatever its ultimate significance may prove to be, this is
certainly one fundamental form of human experience. Some say that
the capacity or incapacity for it is what divides the religious
from the merely moralistic character. With those who undergo it
in its fullness, no criticism avails to cast doubt on its
reality.  They KNOW; for they have actually FELT the higher
powers, in giving up the tension of their personal will.
A story which revivalist preachers often tell is that of a man
who found himself at night slipping down the side of a precipice.
At last he caught a branch which stopped his fall, and remained
clinging to it in misery for hours.  But finally his fingers had
to loose their hold, and with a despairing farewell to life, he
let himself drop.  He fell just six inches.  If he had given up
the struggle earlier, his agony would have been spared.  As the
mother earth received him, so, the preachers tell us, will the
everlasting arms receive us if we confide absolutely in them, and
give up the hereditary habit of relying on our personal strength,
with its precautions that cannot shelter and safeguards that
never save.
The mind-curers have given the widest scope to this sort of
experience.  They have demonstrated that a form of regeneration
by relaxing, by letting go, psychologically indistinguishable
from the Lutheran justification by faith and the Wesleyan
acceptance of free grace, is within the reach of persons who have
no conviction of sin and care nothing for the Lutheran theology. 
It is but giving your little private convulsive self a rest, and
finding that a greater Self is there.  The results, slow or
sudden, or great or small, of the combined optimism and
expectancy, the regenerative phenomena which ensue on the
abandonment of effort, remain firm facts of human nature, no
matter whether we adopt a theistic, a pantheistic-idealistic, or
a medical-materialistic view of their ultimate causal
explanation.[54]
[54] The theistic explanation is by divine grace, which creates a
new nature within one the moment the old nature is sincerely
given up.  The pantheistic explanation (which is that of most
mind-curers) is by the merging of the narrower private self into
the wider or greater self, the spirit of the universe (which is
your own “subconscious” self), the moment the isolating barriers
of mistrust and anxiety are removed.  The medico-materialistic
explanation is that simpler cerebral processes act more freely
where they are left to act automatically by the shunting-out of
physiologically (though in this instance not spiritually)
"higher” ones which, seeking to regulate, only succeed in
inhibiting results.–Whether this third explanation might, in a
psycho-physical account of the universe, be combined with either
of the others may be left an open question here.
When we take up the phenomena of revivalistic conversion, we
shall learn something more about all this.  Meanwhile I will say
a brief word about the mind-curer’s METHODS.
They are of course largely suggestive.  The suggestive influence
of environment plays an enormous part in all spiritual education.
But the word “suggestion,” having acquired official status, is
unfortunately already beginning to play in many quarters the part
of a wet blanket upon investigation, being used to fend off all
inquiry into the varying susceptibilities of individual cases. 
"Suggestion” is only another name for the power of ideas, SO FAR
AS THEY PROVE EFFICACIOUS OVER BELIEF AND CONDUCT.  Ideas
efficacious over some people prove inefficacious over others. 
Ideas efficacious at some times and in some human surroundings
are not so at other times and elsewhere.  The ideas of Christian
churches are not efficacious in the therapeutic direction to-day,
whatever they may have been in earlier centuries; and when the
whole question is as to why the salt has lost its savor here or
gained it there, the mere blank waving of the word “suggestion"
as if it were a banner gives no light.  Dr. Goddard, whose candid
psychological essay on Faith Cures ascribes them to nothing but
ordinary suggestion, concludes by saying that “Religion [and by
this he seems to mean our popular Christianity] has in it all
there is in mental therapeutics, and has it in its best form. 
Living up to [our religious] ideas will do anything for us that
can be done.”  And this in spite of the actual fact that the
popular Christianity does absolutely NOTHING, or did nothing
until mind-cure came to the rescue.[55]
[55] Within the churches a disposition has always prevailed to
regard sickness as a visitation; something sent by God for our
good, either as chastisement, as warning, or as opportunity for
exercising virtue, and, in the Catholic Church, of earning
"merit.”  “Illness,” says a good Catholic writer P. Lejeune: 
(Introd. a la Vie Mystique, 1899, p. 218), “is the most excellent
corporeal mortifications, the mortification which one has not
one’s self chosen, which is imposed directly by God, and is the
direct expression of his will.  ’If other mortifications are of
silver,’  Mgr. Gay says, ’this one is of gold; since although it
comes of ourselves, coming as it does of original sin, still on
its greater side, as coming (like all that happens) from the
providence of God, it is of divine manufacture.  And how just are
its blows!  And how efficacious it is! . . . I do not hesitate to
say that patience in a long illness is mortification’s very
masterpiece, and consequently the triumph of mortified souls.’"
According to this view, disease should in any case be
submissively accepted, and it might under certain circumstances
even be blasphemous to wish it away.
Of course there have been exceptions to this, and cures by
special miracle have at all times been recognized within the
church’s pale, almost all the great saints having more or less
performed them.  It was one of the heresies of Edward Irving, to
maintain them still to be possible.  An extremely pure faculty of
healing after confession and conversion on the patient’s part,
and prayer on the priest’s, was quite spontaneously developed in
the German pastor, Joh. Christoph Blumhardt, in the early forties
and exerted during nearly thirty years.  Blumhardt’s Life by
Zundel (5th edition, Zurich, 1887) gives in chapters ix., x.,
xi., and xvii.  a pretty full account of his healing activity,
which he invariably ascribed to direct divine interposition.
Blumhardt was a singularly pure, simple, and non-fanatical
character, and in this part of his work followed no previous
model.  In Chicago to-day we have the case of Dr. J. A. Dowie, a
Scottish Baptist preacher, whose weekly “Leaves of Healing” were
in the year of grace 1900 in their sixth volume, and who,
although he denounces the cures wrought in other sects as
"diabolical counterfeits” of his own exclusively “Divine
Healing,” must on the whole be counted into the mind-cure
movement.  In mind-cure circles the fundamental article of faith
is that disease should never be accepted. It is wholly of the
pit.  God wants us to be absolutely healthy, and we should not
tolerate ourselves on any lower terms.
An idea, to be suggestive, must come to the individual with the
force of a revelation.  The mind-cure with its gospel of
healthy-mindedness has come as a revelation to many whose hearts
the church Christianity had left hardened.  It has let loose
their springs of higher life.  In what can the originality of any
religious movement consist, save in finding a channel, until then
sealed up, through which those springs may be set free in some
group of human beings?
The force of personal faith, enthusiasm, and example, and above
all the force of novelty, are always the prime suggestive agency
in this kind of success.  If mind-cure should ever become
official, respectable, and intrenched, these elements of
suggestive efficacy will be lost.  In its acuter stages every
religion must be a homeless Arab of the desert.  The church knows
this well enough, with its everlasting inner struggle of the
acute religion of the few against the chronic religion of the
many, indurated into an obstructiveness worse than that which
irreligion opposes to the movings of the Spirit.  “We may pray,"
says Jonathan Edwards, “concerning all those saints that are not
lively Christians, that they may either be enlivened, or taken
away; if that be true that is often said by some at this day,
that these cold dead saints do more hurt than natural men, and
lead more souls to hell, and that it would be well for mankind if
they were all dead."[56]
[56] Edwards, from whose book on the Revival in New England I
quote these words, dissuades from such a use of prayer, but it is
easy to see that he enjoys making his thrust at the cold dead
church members.
The next condition of success is the apparent existence, in large
numbers, of minds who unite healthy-mindedness with readiness for
regeneration by letting go.  Protestantism has been too
pessimistic as regards the natural man, Catholicism has been too
legalistic and moralistic, for either the one or the other to
appeal in any generous way to the type of character formed of
this peculiar mingling of elements. However few of us here
present may belong to such a type, it is now evident that it
forms a specific moral combination, well represented in the
world.
Finally, mind-cure has made what in our protestant countries is
an unprecedentedly great use of the subconscious life.  To their
reasoned advice and dogmatic assertion, its founders have added
systematic exercise in passive relaxation, concentration, and
meditation, and have even invoked something like hypnotic
practice.  I quote some passages at random:–
“The value, the potency of ideals is the great practical truth on
which the New Thought most strongly insists–the development
namely from within outward, from small to great.[57] Consequently
one’s thought should be centred on the ideal outcome, even though
this trust be literally like a step in the dark.[58] To attain
the ability thus effectively to direct the mind, the New Thought
advises the practice of concentration, or in other words, the
attainment of self-control.  One is to learn to marshal the
tendencies of the mind, so that they may be held together as a
unit by the chosen ideal.  To this end, one should set apart
times for silent meditation, by one’s self, preferably in a room
where the surroundings are favorable to spiritual thought.  In
New Thought terms, this is called ’entering the silence.’"[59]
[57] H. W. DRESSER:  Voices of Freedom, 46.
[58] Dresser:  Living by the spirit, 58.
[59] Dresser:  Voices of Freedom, 33.
“The time will come when in the busy office or on the noisy
street you can enter into the silence by simply drawing the
mantle of your own thoughts about you and realizing that there
and everywhere the Spirit of Infinite Life, Love, Wisdom, Peace,
Power, and Plenty is guiding, keeping, protecting, leading you.
This is the spirit of continual prayer.[60] One of the most
intuitive men we ever met had a desk at a city office where
several other gentlemen were doing business constantly, and often
talking loudly.  Entirely undisturbed by the many various sounds
about him, this self-centred faithful man would, in any moment of
perplexity, draw the curtains of privacy so completely about him
that he would be as fully inclosed in his own psychic aura, and
thereby as effectually removed from all distractions, as though
he were alone in some primeval wood.  Taking his difficulty with
him into the mystic silence in the form of a direct question, to
which he expected a certain answer, he would remain utterly
passive until the reply came, and never once through many years’
experience did he find himself disappointed or misled."[61]
[60] Trine:  In Tune with the Infinite, p. 214
[61] Trine:  p. 117.
Wherein, I should like to know, does this INTRINSICALLY differ
from the practice of “recollection” which plays so great a part
in Catholic discipline?  Otherwise called the practice of the
presence of God (and so known among ourselves, as for instance in
Jeremy Taylor), it is thus defined by the eminent teacher Alvarez
de Paz in his work on Contemplation.
“It is the recollection of God, the thought of God, which in all
places and circumstances makes us see him present, lets us
commune respectfully and lovingly with him, and fills us with
desire and affection for him. . . .  Would you escape from every
ill?  Never lose this recollection of God, neither in prosperity
nor in adversity, nor on any occasion whichsoever it be. Invoke
not, to excuse yourself from this duty, either the difficulty or
the importance of your business, for you can always remember that
God sees you, that you are under his eye.  If a thousand times an
hour you forget him, reanimate a thousand times the recollection.
If you cannot practice this exercise continuously, at least make
yourself as familiar with it as possible; and, like unto those
who in a rigorous winter draw near the fire as often as they can,
go as often as you can to that ardent fire which will warm your
soul."[62]
[62] Quoted by Lejeune:  Introd. a la vie Mystique, 1899, p. 66.
All the external associations of the Catholic discipline are of
course unlike anything in mind-cure thought, but the purely
spiritual part of the exercise is identical in both communions,
and in both communions those who urge it write with authority,
for they have evidently experienced in their own persons that
whereof they tell.  Compare again some mind-cure utterances:–
“High, healthful, pure thinking can be encouraged, promoted, and
strengthened.  Its current can be turned upon grand ideals until
it forms a habit and wears a channel.  By means of such
discipline the mental horizon can be flooded with the sunshine of
beauty, wholeness, and harmony.  To inaugurate pure and lofty
thinking may at first seem difficult, even almost mechanical, but
perseverance will at length render it easy, then pleasant, and
finally delightful.
“The soul’s real world is that which it has built of its
thoughts, mental states, and imaginations.  If we WILL, we can
turn our backs upon the lower and sensuous plane, and lift
ourselves into the realm of the spiritual and Real, and there
gain a residence.  The assumption of states of expectancy and
receptivity will attract spiritual sunshine, and it will flow in
as naturally as air inclines to a vacuum. . . .  Whenever the
though; is not occupied with one’s daily duty or profession, it
should he sent aloft into the spiritual atmosphere.  There are
quiet leisure moments by day, and wakeful hours at night, when
this wholesome and delightful exercise may be engaged in to great
advantage.  If one who has never made any systematic effort to
lift and control the thought-forces will, for a single month,
earnestly pursue the course here suggested, he will be surprised
and delighted at the result, and nothing will induce him to go
back to careless, aimless, and superficial thinking.  At such
favorable seasons the outside world, with all its current of
daily events, is barred out, and one goes into the silent
sanctuary of the inner temple of soul to commune and aspire.  The
spiritual hearing becomes delicately sensitive, so that the
’still, small voice’ is audible, the tumultuous waves of external
sense are hushed, and there is a great calm.  The ego gradually
becomes conscious that it is face to face with the Divine
Presence; that mighty, healing, loving, Fatherly life which is
nearer to us than we are to ourselves.  There is soul contact
with the Parent- Soul, and an influx of life, love, virtue,
health, and happiness from the Inexhaustible Fountain."[63]
[63] HENRY Wood:  Ideal suggestion through Mental Photography,
pp. 51, 70 (abridged).
When we reach the subject of mysticism, you will undergo so deep
an immersion into these exalted states of consciousness as to be
wet all over, if I may so express myself; and the cold shiver of
doubt with which this little sprinkling may affect you will have
long since passed away– doubt, I mean, as to whether all such
writing be not mere abstract talk and rhetoric set down pour
encourager les autres.  You will then be convinced, I trust, that
these states of consciousness of “union” form a perfectly
definite class of experiences, of which the soul may occasionally
partake, and which certain persons may live by in a deeper sense
than they live by anything else with which they have
acquaintance.  This brings me to a general philosophical
reflection with which I should like to pass from the subject of
healthy-mindedness, and close a topic which I fear is already
only too long drawn out.  It concerns the relation of all this
systematized healthy-mindedness and mind-cure religion to
scientific method and the scientific life.
In a later lecture I shall have to treat explicitly of the
relation of religion to science on the one hand, and to primeval
savage thought on the other.  There are plenty of persons
to-day–"scientists” or “positivists,” they are fond of calling
themselves–who will tell you that religious thought is a mere
survival, an atavistic reversion to a type of consciousness which
humanity in its more enlightened examples has long since left
behind and out-grown.  If you ask them to explain themselves more
fully, they will probably say that for primitive thought
everything is conceived of under the form of personality.  The
savage thinks that things operate by personal forces, and for the
sake of individual ends.  For him, even external nature obeys
individual needs and claims, just as if these were so many
elementary powers.  Now science, on the other hand, these
positivists say, has proved that personality, so far from being
an elementary force in nature, is but a passive resultant of the
really elementary forces, physical, chemical, physiological, and
psycho-physical, which are all impersonal and general in
character.  Nothing individual accomplishes anything in the
universe save in so far as it obeys and exemplifies some
universal law.  Should you then inquire of them by what means
science has thus supplanted primitive thought, and discredited
its personal way of looking at things, they would undoubtedly say
it has been by the strict use of the method of experimental
verification.  Follow out science’s conceptions practically, they
will say, the conceptions that ignore personality altogether, and
you will always be corroborated.  The world is so made that all
your expectations will be experientially verified so long, and
only so long, as you keep the terms from which you infer them
impersonal and universal.
But here we have mind-cure, with her diametrically opposite
philosophy, setting up an exactly identical claim.  Live as if I
were true, she says, and every day will practically prove you
right.  That the controlling energies of nature are personal,
that your own personal thoughts are forces, that the powers of
the universe will directly respond to your individual appeals and
needs, are propositions which your whole bodily and mental
experience will verify.  And that experience does largely verify
these primeval religious ideas is proved by the fact that the
mind-cure movement spreads as it does, not by proclamation and
assertion simply, but by palpable experiential results.  Here, in
the very heyday of science’s authority, it carries on an
aggressive warfare against the scientific philosophy, and
succeeds by using science’s own peculiar methods and weapons. 
Believing that a higher power will take care of us in certain
ways better than we can take care of ourselves, if we only
genuinely throw ourselves upon it and consent to use it, it finds
the belief, not only not impugned, but corroborated by its
observation.
How conversions are thus made, and converts confirmed, is evident
enough from the narratives which I have quoted. I will quote yet
another couple of shorter ones to give the matter a perfectly
concrete turn.  Here is one:–
“One of my first experiences in applying my teaching was two
months after I first saw the healer.  I fell, spraining my right
ankle, which I had done once four years before, having then had
to use a crutch and elastic anklet for some months, and carefully
guarding it ever since.  As soon as I was on my feet I made the
positive suggestion (and felt it through all my being):  ’There
is nothing but God, and all life comes from him perfectly.  I
cannot be sprained or hurt, I will let him take care of it.’
Well, I never had a sensation in it, and I walked two miles that
day.”
The next case not only illustrates experiment and verification,
but also the element of passivity and surrender of which awhile
ago I made such account.
“I went into town to do some shopping one morning, and I had not
been gone long before I began to feel ill.  The ill feeling
increased rapidly, until I had pains in all my bones, nausea and
faintness, headache, all the symptoms in short that precede an
attack of influenza.  I thought that I was going to have the
grippe, epidemic then in Boston, or something worse.  The
mind-cure teachings that I had been listening to all the winter 
thereupon came into my mind, and I thought that here was an
opportunity to test myself.  On my way home I met a friend, I
refrained with some effort from telling her how I felt.  That was
the first step gained.  I went to bed immediately, and my husband
wished to send for the doctor.  But I told him that I would
rather wait until morning and see how I felt.  Then followed one
of the most beautiful experiences of my life.
“I cannot express it in any other way than to say that I did ’lie
down in the stream of life and let it flow over me.’  I gave up
all fear of any impending disease; I was perfectly willing and
obedient.  There was no intellectual effort, or train of thought.
My dominant idea was:  ’Behold the handmaid of the Lord:  be it
unto me even as thou wilt,’ and a perfect confidence that all
would be well, that all WAS well.  The creative life was flowing
into me every instant, and I felt myself allied with the
Infinite, in harmony, and full of the peace that passeth
understanding.  There was no place in my mind for a jarring body.
I had no consciousness of time or space or persons; but only of
love and happiness and faith.
“I do not know how long this state lasted, nor when I fell
asleep; but when I woke up in the morning, I WAS WELL.”
These are exceedingly trivial instances,[64] but in them, if we
have anything at all, we have the method of experiment and
verification.  For the point I am driving at now, it makes no
difference whether you consider the patients to be deluded
victims of their imagination or not.  That they seemed to
THEMSELVES to have been cured by the experiments tried was enough
to make them converts to the system.  And although it is evident
that one must be of a certain mental mould to get such results
(for not every one can get thus cured to his own satisfaction any
more than every one can be cured by the first regular
practitioner whom he calls in), yet it would surely be pedantic
and over-scrupulous for those who CAN get their savage and
primitive philosophy of mental healing verified in such
experimental ways as this, to give them up at word of command for
more scientific therapeutics.
What are we to think of all this?  Has science made too wide a
claim?
[64] See Appendix to this lecture for two other cases furnished
me by friends.
I believe that the claims of the sectarian scientist are, to say
the least, premature.  The experiences which we have been
studying during this hour (and a great many other kinds of
religious experiences are like them) plainly show the universe to
be a more many-sided affair than any sect, even the scientific
sect, allows for.  What, in the end, are all our verifications
but experiences that agree with more or less isolated systems of
ideas (conceptual systems) that our minds have framed?  But why
in the name of common sense need we assume that only one such
system of ideas can be true?  The obvious outcome of our total
experience is that the world can be handled according to many
systems of ideas, and is so handled by different men, and will
each time give some characteristic kind of profit, for which he
cares, to the handler, while at the same time some other kind of
profit has to be omitted or postponed.  Science gives to all of
us telegraphy, electric lighting, and diagnosis, and succeeds in
preventing and curing a certain amount of disease. Religion in
the shape of mind-cure gives to some of us serenity, moral poise,
and happiness, and prevents certain forms of disease as well as
science does, or even better in a certain class of persons. 
Evidently, then, the science and the religion are both of them
genuine keys for unlocking the world’s treasure-house to him who
can use either of them practically.  Just as evidently neither is
exhaustive or exclusive of the other’s simultaneous use.  And
why, after all, may not the world be so complex as to consist of
many interpenetrating spheres of reality, which we can thus
approach in alternation by using different conceptions and
assuming different attitudes, just as mathematicians handle the
same numerical and spatial facts by geometry, by analytical 
geometry, by algebra, by the calculus, or by quaternions, and
each time come out right?  On this view religion and science,
each verified in its own way from hour to hour and from life to
life, would be co-eternal.  Primitive thought, with its belief in
individualized personal forces, seems at any rate as far as ever
from being driven by science from the field to-day.  Numbers of
educated people still find it the directest experimental channel
by which to carry on their intercourse with reality.[65]
[65] Whether the various spheres or systems are ever to fuse
integrally into one absolute conception, as most philosophers
assume that they must, and how, if so, that conception may best
be reached, are questions that only the future can answer.  What
is certain now is the fact of lines of disparate conception, each
corresponding to some part of the world’s truth, each verified in
some degree, each leaving out some part of real experience.
The case of mind-cure lay so ready to my hand that I could not
resist the temptation of using it to bring these last truths home
to your attention, but I must content myself to-day with this
very brief indication.  In a later lecture the relations of
religion both to science and to primitive thought will have to
receive much more explicit attention.
(See note [64].)
CASE I.  “My own experience is this:  I had long been ill, and
one of the first results of my illness, a dozen years before, had
been a diplopia which deprived me of the use of my eyes for
reading and writing almost entirely, while a later one had been
to shut me out from exercise of any kind under penalty of
immediate and great exhaustion.  I had been under the care of
doctors of the highest standing both in Europe and America, men
in whose power to help me I had had great faith, with no or ill
result.  Then, at a time when I seemed to be rather rapidly
losing ground, I heard some things that gave me interest enough
in mental healing to make me try it; I had no great hope of
getting any good from it–it was a CHANCE I tried, partly
because my thought was interested by the new possibility it
seemed to open, partly because it was the only chance I then
could see. I went to X in Boston, from whom some friends of mine
had got, or thought they had got, great help; the treatment was a
silent one; little was said, and that little carried no
conviction to my mind, whatever influence was exerted was that of
another person’s thought or feeling silently projected on to my
unconscious mind, into my nervous system as it were, as we sat
still together.  I believed from the start in the POSSIBILITY of
such action, for I knew the power of the mind to shape, helping
or hindering, the body’s nerve-activities, and I thought
telepathy probable, although unproved, but I had no belief in it
as more than a possibility, and no strong conviction nor any
mystic or religious faith connected with my thought of it that
might have brought imagination strongly into play.
“I sat quietly with the healer for half an hour each day, at
first with no result; then, after ten days or so, I became quite
suddenly and swiftly conscious of a tide of new energy rising
within me, a sense of power to pass beyond old halting-places, of
power to break the bounds that, though often tried before, had
long been veritable walls about my life, too high to climb.  I
began to read and walk as I had not done for years, and the
change was sudden, marked, and unmistakable.  This tide seemed to
mount for some weeks, three or four perhaps, when, summer having
come, I came away, taking the treatment up again a few months
later.  The lift I got proved permanent, and left me slowly
gaining ground instead of losing, it but with this lift the
influence seemed in a way to have spent itself, and, though my
confidence in the reality of the power had gained immensely from
this first experience, and should have helped me to make further
gain in health and strength if my belief in it had been the
potent factor there, I never after this got any result at all as
striking or as clearly marked as this which came when I made
trial of it first, with little faith and doubtful expectation. 
It is difficult to put all the evidence in such a matter into
words, to gather up into a distinct statement all that one bases
one’s conclusions on, but I have always felt that I had abundant
evidence to justify (to myself, at least) the conclusion that I
came to then, and since have held to, that the physical change
which came at that time was, first, the result of a change
wrought within me by a change of mental state; and secondly, that
that change of mental state was not, save in a very secondary
way, brought about through the influence of an excited
imagination, or a CONSCIOUSLY received suggestion of an hypnotic
sort.  Lastly, I believe that this change was the result of my
receiving telephathically, and upon a mental stratum quite below
the level of immediate consciousness, a healthier and more
energetic attitude, receiving it from another person whose
thought was directed upon me with the intention of impressing the
idea of this attitude upon me.  In my case the disease was
distinctly what would be classed as nervous, not organic; but
from such opportunities as I have had of observing, I have come
to the conclusion that the dividing line that has been drawn is
an arbitrary one, the nerves controlling the internal activities
and the nutrition of the body throughout; and I believe that the
central nervous system, by starting and inhibiting local centres,
can exercise a vast influence upon disease of any kind, if it can
be brought to bear.  In my judgment the question is simply how to
bring it to bear, and I think that the uncertainty and remarkable
differences in the results obtained through mental healing do but
show how ignorant we are as yet of the forces at work and of the
means we should take to make them effective.  That these results
are not due to chance coincidences my observation of myself and
others makes me sure; that the conscious mind, the imagination,
enters into them as a factor in many cases is doubtless true, but
in many others, and sometimes very extraordinary ones, it hardly
seems to enter in at all.  On the whole I am inclined to think
that as the healing action, like the morbid one, springs from the
plane of the normally UNconscious mind, so the strongest and most
effective impressions are those which IT receives, in some as yet
unknown subtle way, DIRECTLY from a healthier mind whose state,
through a hidden law of sympathy, it reproduces.”
CASE II.  “At the urgent request of friends, and with no faith
and hardly any hope (possibly owing to a previous unsuccessful
experience with a Christian Scientist), our little daughter was
placed under the care of a healer, and cured of a trouble about
which the physician had been very discouraging in his diagnosis.
This interested me, and I began studying earnestly the method and
philosophy of this method of healing.  Gradually an inner peace
and tranquillity came to me in so positive a way that my manner
changed greatly.  My children and friends noticed the change and
commented upon it.  All feelings of irritability disappeared. 
Even the expression of my face changed noticeably.
“I had been bigoted, aggressive, and intolerant in discussion,
both in public and private.  I grew broadly tolerant and
receptive toward the views of others.  I had been nervous and
irritable, coming home two or three times a week with a sick
headache induced, as I then supposed, by dyspepsia and catarrh. 
I grew serene and gentle, and the physical troubles entirely
disappeared.  I had been in the habit of approaching every
business interview with an almost morbid dread.  I now meet every
one with confidence and inner calm.
“I may say that the growth has all been toward the elimination of
selfishness.  I do not mean simply the grosser, more sensual
forms, but those subtler and generally unrecognized kinds, such
as express themselves in sorrow, grief, regret, envy, etc. It has
been in the direction of a practical, working realization of the
immanence of God and the Divinity of man’s true, inner self.
At our last meeting, we considered the healthy-minded
temperament, the temperament which has a constitutional
incapacity for prolonged suffering, and in which the tendency to
see things optimistically is like a water of crystallization in
which the individual’s character is set.  We saw how this
temperament may become the basis for a peculiar type of religion,
a religion in which good, even the good of this world’s life, is
regarded as the essential thing for a rational being to attend
to.  This religion directs him to settle his scores with the more
evil aspects of the universe by systematically declining to lay
them to heart or make much of them, by ignoring them in his
reflective calculations, or even, on occasion, by denying
outright that they exist.  Evil is a disease; and worry over
disease is itself an additional form of disease, which only adds
to the original complaint.  Even repentance and remorse,
affections which come in the character of ministers of good, may
be but sickly and relaxing impulses.  The best repentance is to
up and act for righteousness, and forget that you ever had
relations with sin.
Spinoza’s philosophy has this sort of healthy-mindedness woven
into the heart of it, and this has been one secret of its
fascination.  He whom Reason leads, according to Spinoza, is led
altogether by the influence over his mind of good.  Knowledge of
evil is an “inadequate” knowledge, fit only for slavish minds. 
So Spinoza categorically condemns repentance.  When men make
mistakes, he says–
“One might perhaps expect gnawings of conscience and repentance
to help to bring them on the right path, and might thereupon
conclude (as every one does conclude) that these affections are
good things.  Yet when we look at the matter closely, we shall
find that not only are they not good, but on the contrary
deleterious and evil passions.  For it is manifest that we can
always get along better by reason and love of truth than by worry
of conscience and remorse.  Harmful are these and evil, inasmuch
as they form a particular kind of sadness; and the disadvantages
of sadness,” he continues, “I have already proved, and shown that
we should strive to keep it from our life.  Just so we should
endeavor, since uneasiness of conscience and remorse are of this
kind of complexion, to flee and shun these states of mind."[66]
[66] Tract on God, Man, and Happiness, Book ii. ch. x.
Within the Christian body, for which repentance of sins has from
the beginning been the critical religious act, healthy-mindedness
has always come forward with its milder interpretation. 
Repentance according to such healthy- minded Christians means
GETTING AWAY FROM the sin, not groaning and writhing over its
commission.  The Catholic practice of confession and absolution
is in one of its aspects little more than a systematic method of
keeping healthy- mindedness on top.  By it a man’s accounts with
evil are periodically squared and audited, so that he may start
the clean page with no old debts inscribed.  Any Catholic will
tell us how clean and fresh and free he feels after the purging
operation.  Martin Luther by no means belonged to the
healthy-minded type in the radical sense in which we have
discussed it, and he repudiated priestly absolution for sin. Yet
in this matter of repentance he had some very healthy- minded
ideas, due in the main to the largeness of his conception of God.
“When I was a monk,” he says “I thought that I was utterly cast
away, if at any time I felt the lust of the flesh:  that is to
say, if I felt any evil motion, fleshly lust, wrath, hatred, or
envy against any brother.  I assayed many ways to help to quiet
my conscience, but It would not be; for the concupiscence and
lust of my flesh did always return, so that I could not rest, but
was continually vexed with these thoughts:  This or that sin thou
hast committed:  thou art infected with envy, with impatiency,
and such other sins:  therefore thou art entered into this holy
order in vain, and all thy good works are unprofitable.  But if
then I had rightly understood these sentences of Paul:  ’The
flesh lusteth contrary to the Spirit, and the Spirit contrary to
the flesh; and these two are one against another, so that ye
cannot do the things that ye would do,’ I should not have so
miserably tormented myself, but should have thought and said to
myself, as now commonly I do, ’Martin, thou shalt not utterly be
without sin, for thou hast flesh; thou shalt therefore feel the
battle thereof.’  I remember that Staupitz was wont to say, ’I
have vowed unto God above a thousand times that I would become a
better man:  but I never performed that which I vowed.  Hereafter
I will make no such vow:  for I have now learned by experience
that I am not able to perform it.  Unless, therefore, God be
favorable and merciful unto me for Christ’s sake, I shall not be
able, with all my vows and all my good deeds, to stand before
him.’ This (of Staupitz’s) was not only a true, but also a godly
and a holy desperation; and this must they all confess, both with
mouth and heart, who will be saved.  For the godly trust not to
their own righteousness.  They look unto Christ their reconciler
who gave his life for their sins.  Moreover, they know that the
remnant of sin which is in their flesh is not laid to their
charge, but freely pardoned.  Notwithstanding, in the mean while
they fight in spirit against the flesh, lest they should FULFILL
the lusts thereof; and although they feel the flesh to rage and
rebel, and themselves also do fall sometimes into sin through
infirmity, yet are they not discouraged, nor think therefore that
their state and kind of life, and the works which are done
according to their calling, displease God; but they raise up
themselves by faith."[67]
[67] Commentary on Galatians, Philadelphia, 1891, pp. 510-514
(abridged).
One of the heresies for which the Jesuits got that spiritual
genius, Molinos, the founder of Quietism, so abominably condemned
was his healthy-minded opinion of repentance:–
“When thou fallest into a fault, in what matter soever it be do
not trouble nor afflict thyself for it.  For they are effects of
our frail Nature, stained by Original Sin.  The common enemy will
make thee believe, as soon as thou fallest into any fault, that
thou walkest in error, and therefore art out of God and his
favor, and herewith would he make thee distrust of the divine
Grace, telling thee of thy misery, and making a giant of it; and
putting it into thy head that every day thy soul grows worse
instead of better, whilst it so often repeats these failings.  O
blessed Soul, open thine eyes; and shut the gate against these
diabolical suggestions, knowing thy misery, and trusting in the
mercy divine.  Would not he be a mere fool who, running at
tournament with others, and falling in the best of the career,
should lie weeping on the ground and afflicting himself with
discourses upon his fall?  Man (they would tell him), lose no
time, get up and take the course again, for he that rises again
quickly and continues his race is as if he had never fallen.  If
thou seest thyself fallen once and a thousand times, thou
oughtest to make use of the remedy which I have given thee, that
is, a loving confidence in the divine mercy.  These are the
weapons with which thou must fight and conquer cowardice and vain
thoughts.  This is the means thou oughtest to use–not to lose
time, not to disturb thyself, and reap no good."[68]
[68] Molinos:  Spiritual Guide, Book II., chaps. xvii., xviii.
abridged.
Now in contrast with such healthy-minded views as these, if we
treat them as a way of deliberately minimizing evil, stands a
radically opposite view, a way of maximizing evil, if you please
so to call it, based on the persuasion that the evil aspects of
our life are of its very essence, and that the world’s meaning
most comes home to us when we lay them most to heart.  We have
now to address ourselves to this <129> more morbid way of
looking at the situation.  But as I closed our last hour with a
general philosophical reflection on the healthy-minded way of
taking life, I should like at this point to make another
philosophical reflection upon it before turning to that heavier
task.  You will excuse the brief delay.
If we admit that evil is an essential part of our being and the
key to the interpretation of our life, we load ourselves down
with a difficulty that has always proved burdensome in
philosophies of religion.  Theism, whenever it has erected itself
into a systematic philosophy of the universe, has shown a
reluctance to let God be anything less than All-in-All.  In other
words, philosophic theism has always shown a tendency to become
pantheistic and monistic, and to consider the world as one unit
of absolute fact; and this has been at variance with popular or
practical theism, which latter has ever been more or less frankly
pluralistic, not to say polytheistic, and shown itself perfectly
well satisfied with a universe composed of many original
principles, provided we be only allowed to believe that the
divine principle remains supreme, and that the others are
subordinate.  In this latter case God is not necessarily
responsible for the existence of evil; he would only be
responsible if it were not finally overcome.  But on the monistic
or pantheistic view, evil, like everything else, must have its
foundation in God; and the difficulty is to see how this can
possibly be the case if God be absolutely good.  This difficulty
faces us in every form of philosophy in which the world appears
as one flawless unit of fact.  Such a unit is an INDIVIDUAL, and
in it the worst parts must be as essential as the best, must be
as necessary to make the individual what he is; since if any part
whatever in an individual were to vanish or alter, it would no
longer be THAT individual at all.  The philosophy of absolute
idealism, so vigorously represented both in Scotland and America
to-day, has to struggle with this difficulty quite as <130>
much as scholastic theism struggled in its time; and although it
would be premature to say that there is no speculative issue
whatever from the puzzle, it is perfectly fair to say that there
is no clear or easy issue, and that the only OBVIOUS escape from
paradox here is to cut loose from the monistic assumption
altogether, and to allow the world to have existed from its
origin in pluralistic form, as an aggregate or collection of
higher and lower things and principles, rather than an absolutely
unitary fact.  For then evil would not need to be essential; it
might be, and may always have been, an independent portion that
had no rational or absolute right to live with the rest, and
which we might conceivably hope to see got rid of at last.
Now the gospel of healthy-mindedness, as we have described it,
casts its vote distinctly for this pluralistic view. Whereas the
monistic philosopher finds himself more or less bound to say, as
Hegel said, that everything actual is rational, and that evil, as
an element dialectically required, must be pinned in and kept and
consecrated and have a function awarded to it in the final system
of truth, healthy-mindedness refuses to say anything of the
sort.[69] Evil, it says, is emphatically irrational, and NOT to
be pinned in, or preserved, or consecrated in any final system of
truth.  It is a pure abomination to the Lord, an alien unreality,
a waste element, to be sloughed off and negated, and the very
memory of it, if possible, wiped out and forgotten.  The ideal,
so far from being co-extensive with the whole actual, is a mere
EXTRACT from the actual, marked by its deliverance from all
contact with this diseased, inferior, and excrementitious stuff.
[69] I say this in spite of the monistic utterances of many
mind-cure writers; for these utterances are really inconsistent
with their attitude towards disease, and can easily be shown not
to be logically involved in the experiences of union with a
higher Presence with which they connect themselves.  The higher
Presence, namely, need not be the absolute whole of things, it is
quite sufficient for the life of religious experience to regard
it as a part, if only it be the most ideal part.
Here we have the interesting notion fairly and squarely presented
to us, of there being elements of the universe which may make no
rational whole in conjunction with the other elements, and which,
from the point of view of any system which those other elements
make up, can only be considered so much irrelevance and
accident–so much “dirt,” as it were, and matter out of place.  I
ask you now not to forget this notion; for although most
philosophers seem either to forget it or to disdain it too much
ever to mention it, I believe that we shall have to admit it
ourselves in the end as containing an element of truth.  The
mind-cure gospel thus once more appears to us as having dignity
and importance.  We have seen it to be a genuine religion, and no
mere silly appeal to imagination to cure disease; we have seen
its method of experimental verification to be not unlike the
method of all science; and now here we find mind- cure as the
champion of a perfectly definite conception of the metaphysical
structure of the world.  I hope that, in view of all this, you
will not regret my having pressed it upon your attention at such
length.
Let us now say good-by for a while to all this way of thinking,
and turn towards those persons who cannot so swiftly throw off
the burden of the consciousness of evil, but are congenitally
fated to suffer from its presence.  Just as we saw that in
healthy-mindedness there are shallower and profounder levels,
happiness like that of the mere animal, and more regenerate sorts
of happiness, so also are there different levels of the morbid
mind, and the one is much more formidable than the other.  There
are people for whom evil means only a mal-adjustment with THINGS,
a wrong correspondence of one’s life with the environment. Such
evil as this is curable, in principle at least, upon the 
natural plane, for merely by modifying either the self or the
things, or both at once, the two terms may be made to fit, and
all go merry as a marriage bell again.  But there are others for
whom evil is no mere relation of the subject to particular outer
things, but something more radical and general, a wrongness or
vice in his essential nature, which no alteration of the
environment, or any superficial rearrangement of the inner self,
can cure, and which requires a supernatural remedy.  On the
whole, the Latin races have leaned more towards the former way of
looking upon evil, as made up of ills and sins in the plural,
removable in detail; while the Germanic races have tended rather
to think of Sin in the singular, and with a capital S, as of
something ineradicably ingrained in our natural subjectivity, and
never to be removed by any superficial piecemeal operations.[70]
These comparisons of races are always open to exception, but
undoubtedly the northern tone in religion has inclined to the
more intimately pessimistic persuasion, and this way of feeling,
being the more extreme, we shall find by far the more instructive
for our study.
[70] Cf. J. Milsand:  Luther et le Serf-Arbitre, 1884, passim.
Recent psychology has found great use for the word “threshold” as
a symbolic designation for the point at which one state of mind
passes into another.  Thus we speak of the threshold of a man’s
consciousness in general, to indicate the amount of noise,
pressure, or other outer stimulus which it takes to arouse his
attention at all.  One with a high threshold will doze through an
amount of racket by which one with a low threshold would be
immediately waked.  Similarly, when one is sensitive to small
differences in any order of sensation, we say he has a low
"difference- threshold"–his mind easily steps over it into the
consciousness of the differences in question.  And just so we
might speak of a “pain-threshold,” a “fear-threshold,” a
"misery-threshold,” and find it quickly overpassed by the
consciousness of some individuals, but lying too high in others
to be often reached by their consciousness.  The sanguine and
healthy-minded live habitually on the sunny side of their
misery-line, the depressed and melancholy live beyond it, in
darkness and apprehension.  There are men who seem to have
started in life with a bottle or two of champagne inscribed to
their credit; whilst others seem to have been born close to the
pain-threshold, which the slightest irritants fatally send them
over.
Does it not appear as if one who lived more habitually on one
side of the pain-threshold might need a different sort of
religion from one who habitually lived on the other?  This
question, of the relativity of different types of religion to
different types of need, arises naturally at this point, and will
became a serious problem ere we have done.  But before we
confront it in general terms, we must address ourselves to the
unpleasant task of hearing what the sick souls, as we may call
them in contrast to the healthy-minded, have to say of the
secrets of their prison-house, their own peculiar form of
consciousness.  Let us then resolutely turn our backs on the
once-born and their sky-blue optimistic gospel; let us not simply
cry out, in spite of all appearances, “Hurrah for the
Universe!–God’s in his Heaven, all’s right with the world.”   
Let us see rather whether pity, pain, and fear, and the sentiment
of human helplessness may not open a profounder view and put into
our hands a more complicated key to the meaning of the situation.
To begin with, how CAN things so insecure as the successful
experiences of this world afford a stable anchorage?  A chain is
no stronger than its weakest link, and life is after all a chain.
In the healthiest and most prosperous existence, how many links
of illness, danger, and disaster are always interposed? 
Unsuspectedly from the bottom of every fountain of pleasure, as
the old poet said, something bitter rises up:  a touch of nausea,
a falling dead of the delight, a whiff of melancholy, things that
sound a knell, for fugitive as they may be, they bring a feeling
of coming from a deeper region and often have an appalling
convincingness.  The buzz of life ceases at their touch as a
piano-string stops sounding when the damper falls upon it.
Of course the music can commence again;–and again and again–at
intervals.  But with this the healthy-minded consciousness is
left with an irremediable sense of precariousness.  It is a bell
with a crack; it draws its breath on sufferance and by an
accident.
Even if we suppose a man so packed with healthy-mindedness as
never to have experienced in his own person any of these sobering
intervals, still, if he is a reflecting being, he must generalize
and class his own lot with that of others; and, doing so, he must
see that his escape is just a lucky chance and no essential
difference.  He might just as well have been born to an entirely
different fortune.  And then indeed the hollow security! What
kind of a frame of things is it of which the best you can say is,
"Thank God, it has let me off clear this time!”  Is not its
blessedness a fragile fiction?  Is not your joy in it a very
vulgar glee, not much unlike the snicker of any rogue at his
success?  If indeed it were all success, even on such terms as
that! But take the happiest man, the one most envied by the
world, and in nine cases out of ten his inmost consciousness is
one of failure.  Either his ideals in the line of his
achievements are pitched far higher than the achievements
themselves, or else he has secret ideals of which the world knows
nothing, and in regard to which he inwardly knows himself to be
found wanting.
When such a conquering optimist as Goethe can express himself in
this wise, how must it be with less successful men? <135>
“I will say nothing,” writes Goethe in 1824, “against the course
of my existence.  But at bottom it has been nothing but pain and
burden, and I can affirm that during the whole of my 75 years, I
have not had four weeks of genuine well-being.  It is but the
perpetual rolling of a rock that must be raised up again
forever.”
What single-handed man was ever on the whole as successful as
Luther?  Yet when he had grown old, he looked back on his life as
if it were an absolute failure.
“I am utterly weary of life.  I pray the Lord will come forthwith
and carry me hence.  Let him come, above all, with his last
Judgment:  I will stretch out my neck, the thunder will burst
forth, and I shall be at rest."–And having a necklace of white
agates in his hand at the time he added:  “O God, grant that it
may come without delay.  I would readily eat up this necklace
to-day, for the Judgment to come to-morrow."–The Electress
Dowager, one day when Luther was dining with her, said to him: 
"Doctor, I wish you may live forty years to come.” “Madam,"
replied he, “rather than live forty years more, I would give up
my chance of Paradise.”
Failure, then, failure! so the world stamps us at every turn.  We
strew it with our blunders, our misdeeds, our lost opportunities,
with all the memorials of our inadequacy to our vocation.  And
with what a damning emphasis does it then blot us out!  No easy
fine, no mere apology or formal expiation, will satisfy the
world’s demands, but every pound of flesh exacted is soaked with
all its blood.  The subtlest forms of suffering known to man are
connected with the poisonous humiliations incidental to these
results.
And they are pivotal human experiences.  A process so ubiquitous
and everlasting is evidently an integral part of life.  “There is
indeed one element in human destiny,” Robert Louis Stevenson
writes, “that not blindness itself can controvert.  Whatever else
we are intended to do, we are not  intended to succeed; failure
is the fate allotted."[71] And our nature being thus rooted in
failure, is it any wonder that theologians should have held it to
be essential, and thought that only through the personal
experience of humiliation which it engenders the deeper sense of
life’s significance is reached?[72]
[71] He adds with characteristic healthy-mindedness:  “Our
business is to continue to fail in good spirits.”
[72] The God of many men is little more than their court of
appeal against the damnatory judgment passed on their failures by
the opinion of this world.  To our own consciousness there is
usually a residuum of worth left over after our sins and errors
have been told off–our capacity of acknowledging and regretting
them is the germ of a better self in posse at least.  But the
world deals with us in actu and not in posse:  and of this hidden
germ, not to be guessed at from without, it never takes account. 
Then we turn to the All-knower, who knows our bad, but knows this
good in us also, and who is just.  We cast ourselves with our
repentance on his mercy only by an All-knower can we finally be
judged.  So the need of a God very definitely emerges from this
sort of experience of life.
But this is only the first stage of the world-sickness.  Make the
human being’s sensitiveness a little greater, carry him a little
farther over the misery-threshold, and the good quality of the
successful moments themselves when they occur is spoiled and
vitiated.  All natural goods perish.  Riches take wings; fame is
a breath; love is a cheat; youth and health and pleasure vanish. 
Can things whose end is always dust and disappointment be the
real goods which our souls require? Back of everything is the
great spectre of universal death, the all-encompassing
blackness:–
“What profit hath a man of all his labour which he taketh under
the Sun?  I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought,
and behold, all was vanity and vexation of spirit.  For that
which befalleth the sons of men befalleth beasts; as the one
dieth, so dieth the other, all are of the dust, and all turn to
dust again. . . .  The dead know not anything, neither have they
any more a reward; for the memory of them is forgotten.  Also
their love and their hatred and their envy is now perished;
neither have they any more a portion for ever in anything that is
done under the Sun. . . . Truly the light is sweet, and a
pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the Sun:  but if a
man live many years and rejoice in them all, yet let him remember
the days of darkness; for they shall be many.”
In short, life and its negation are beaten up inextricably
together.  But if the life be good, the negation of it must be
bad.  Yet the two are equally essential facts of existence; and
all natural happiness thus seems infected with a contradiction. 
The breath of the sepulchre surrounds it.
To a mind attentive to this state of things and rightly subject
to the joy-destroying chill which such a contemplation engenders,
the only relief that healthy-mindedness can give is by saying: 
"Stuff and nonsense, get out into the open air!” or “Cheer up,
old fellow, you’ll be all right erelong, if you will only drop
your morbidness!”  But in all seriousness, can such bald animal
talk as that be treated as a rational answer?  To ascribe
religious value to mere happy-go-lucky contentment with one’s
brief chance at natural good is but the very consecration of
forgetfulness and superficiality.  Our troubles lie indeed too
deep for THAT cure.  The fact that we CAN die, that we CAN be ill
at all, is what perplexes us; the fact that we now for a moment
live and are well is irrelevant to that perplexity.  We need a
life not correlated with death, a health not liable to illness, a
kind of good that will not perish, a good in fact that flies
beyond the Goods of nature.
It all depends on how sensitive the soul may become to discords. 
"The trouble with me is that I believe too much in common
happiness and goodness,” said a friend of mine whose
consciousness was of this sort, “and nothing can console me for
their transiency.  I am appalled and disconcerted at its being
possible.”    And so with most of us:  a little cooling down of
animal excitability and instinct, a little loss of animal
toughness, a little irritable weakness and descent of the
pain-threshold, will bring the worm at the core of all our usual
springs of delight into full view, and turn us into melancholy
metaphysicians.  The pride of life and glory of the world will
shrivel.  It is after all but the standing quarrel of hot youth
and hoary eld.  Old age has the last word:  the purely
naturalistic look at life, however enthusiastically it may begin,
is sure to end in sadness.
This sadness lies at the heart of every merely positivistic,
agnostic, or naturalistic scheme of philosophy.  Let sanguine
healthy-mindedness do its best with its strange power of living
in the moment and ignoring and forgetting, still the evil
background is really there to be thought of, and the skull will
grin in at the banquet.  In the practical life of the individual,
we know how his whole gloom or glee about any present fact
depends on the remoter schemes and hopes with which it stands
related.  Its significance and framing give it the chief part of
its value.  Let it be known to lead nowhere, and however
agreeable it may be in its immediacy, its glow and gilding
vanish.  The old man, sick with an insidious internal disease,
may laugh and quaff his wine at first as well as ever, but he
knows his fate now, for the doctors have revealed it; and the
knowledge knocks the satisfaction out of all these functions. 
They are partners of death and the worm is their brother, and
they turn to a mere flatness.
The lustre of the present hour is always borrowed from the
background of possibilities it goes with.  Let our common
experiences be enveloped in an eternal moral order; let our
suffering have an immortal significance; let Heaven smile upon
the earth, and deities pay their visits; let faith and hope be
the atmosphere which man breathes in;–and his days pass by with
zest; they stir with prospects, they thrill with remoter values. 
Place round them on the contrary the curdling cold and gloom and
absence of all permanent meaning which for pure naturalism and
the popular science evolutionism of our time are all that is
visible ultimately, and the thrill stops short, or turns rather
to an anxious trembling.
For naturalism, fed on recent cosmological speculations, mankind
is in a position similar to that of a set of people living on a
frozen lake, surrounded by cliffs over which there is no escape,
yet knowing that little by little the ice is melting, and the
inevitable day drawing near when the last film of it will
disappear, and to be drowned ignominiously will be the human
creature’s portion.  The merrier the skating, the warmer and more
sparkling the sun by day, and the ruddier the bonfires at night,
the more poignant the sadness with which one must take in the
meaning of the total situation.
The early Greeks are continually held up to us in literary works
as models of the healthy-minded joyousness which the religion of
nature may engender.  There was indeed much joyousness among the
Greeks–Homer’s flow of enthusiasm for most things that the sun
shines upon is steady.  But even in Homer the reflective passages
are cheerless,[73] and the moment the Greeks grew systematically
pensive and thought of ultimates, they became unmitigated
pessimists.[74] The jealousy of the gods, the nemesis that
follows  too much happiness, the all-encompassing death, fate’s
dark opacity, the ultimate and unintelligible cruelty, were the
fixed background of their imagination.  The beautiful joyousness
of their polytheism is only a poetic modern fiction.  They knew
no joys comparable in quality of preciousness to those which we
shall erelong see that Ilrahmans, Buddhists, Christians,
Mohammedans, twice-born people whose religion is
non-naturalistic, get from their several creeds of mysticism and
renunciation.
[73] E.g., Iliad XVII. 446:  “Nothing then is more wretched
anywhere than man of all that breathes and creeps upon this
earth.”
[74] E.g., Theognis, 425-428:  “Best of all for all things upon
earth is it not to be born nor to behold the splendors of the
sun; next best to traverse as soon as possible the gates of
Hades.”  See also the almost identical passage in Oedipus in
Colonus, 1225.–The Anthology is full of pessimistic utterances: 
"Naked came I upon the earth, naked I go below the ground–why
then do I vainly toil when I see the end naked before me?"–"How
did I come to be? Whence am l?  Wherefore did I come?  To pass
away.  How can I learn aught when naught I know?  Being naught I
came to life:  once more shall I be what I was.  Nothing and
nothingness is the whole race of mortals."–"For death we are all
cherished and fattened like a herd of hogs that is wantonly
butchered.”
The difference between Greek pessimism and the oriental and
modern variety is that the Greeks had not made the discovery that
the pathetic mood may be idealized, and figure as a higher form
of sensibility.  Their spirit was still too essentially masculine
for pessimism to be elaborated or lengthily dwelt on in their
classic literature.  They would have despised a life set wholly
in a minor key, and summoned it to keep within the proper bounds
of lachrymosity. The discovery that the enduring emphasis, so far
as this world goes, may be laid on its pain and failure, was
reserved for races more complex, and (so to speak) more feminine
than the Hellenes had attained to being in the classic period. 
But all the same was the outlook of those Hellenes blackly
pessimistic.
Stoic insensibility and Epicurean resignation were the farthest
advance which the Greek mind made in that direction. The
Epicurean said:  “Seek not to be happy, but rather to escape
unhappiness; strong happiness is always linked with pain;
therefore hug the safe shore, and do not tempt the deeper
raptures.  Avoid disappointment by expecting little, and by
aiming low; and above all do not fret.”  The Stoic said:  “The
only genuine good that life can yield a man is the free
possession of his own soul; all other goods are lies.”  Each of
these philosophies is in its degree a philosophy of despair in
nature’s boons.  Trustful self-abandonment to the joys that
freely offer has entirely departed from both Epicurean and Stoic;
and what each proposes is a way of rescue from the resultant
dust-and-ashes state of mind.  The Epicurean still awaits results
from economy of indulgence and damping of desire.  The Stoic
hopes for no results, and gives up natural good altogether. 
There is dignity in both these forms of resignation.  They
represent distinct stages in the sobering process which man’s
primitive intoxication with sense-happiness is sure to undergo. 
In the one the hot blood has grown cool, in the other it has
become quite cold; and although I have spoken of them in the past
tense, as if they were merely historic, yet Stoicism and
Epicureanism will probably be to all time typical attitudes,
marking a certain definite stage accomplished in the evolution of
the world-sick soul.[75] They mark the conclusion of what we call
the once-born period, and represent the highest flights of what
twice-born religion would call the purely natural man
–Epicureanism, which can only by great courtesy be called a
religion, showing his refinement, and Stoicism exhibiting his
moral will.  They leave the world in the shape of an unreconciled
contradiction, and seek no higher unity.  Compared with the
complex ecstasies which the supernaturally regenerated Christian
may enjoy, or the oriental pantheist indulge in, their receipts
for equanimity are expedients which seem almost crude in their
simplicity.
[75] For instance, on the very day on which I write this page,
the post brings me some aphorisms from a worldly-wise old friend
in Heidelberg which may serve as a good contemporaneous
expression of Epicureanism:  “By the word ’happiness’ every human
being understands something different.  It is a phantom pursued
only by weaker minds.  The wise man is satisfied with the more
modest but much more definite term CONTENTMENT.  What education
should chiefly aim at is to save us from a discontented life. 
Health is one favoring condition, but by no means an
indispensable one, of contentment.  Woman’s heart and love are a
shrewd device of Nature, a trap which she sets for the average
man, to force him into working.  But the wise man will always
prefer work chosen by himself.”
Please observe, however, that I am not yet pretending finally to
JUDGE any of these attitudes.  I am only describing their
variety.  The securest way to the rapturous sorts of happiness of
which the twice-born make report has as an historic matter of
fact been through a more radical pessimism than anything that we
have yet considered.  We have seen how the lustre and enchantment
may be rubbed off from the goods of nature.  But there is a pitch
of unhappiness so great that the goods of nature may be entirely
forgotten, and all sentiment of their existence vanish from the
mental field.  For this extremity of pessimism to be reached,
something more is needed than observation of life and reflection
upon death.  The individual must in his own person become the
prey of a pathological melancholy.  As the healthy-minded
enthusiast succeeds in ignoring evil’s very existence, so the
subject of melancholy is forced in spite of himself to ignore
that of all good whatever:  for him it may no longer have the
least reality.  Such sensitiveness and susceptibility to mental
pain is a rare occurrence where the nervous constitution is
entirely normal; one seldom finds it in a healthy subject even
where he is the victim of the most atrocious cruelties of outward
fortune.  So we note here the neurotic constitution, of which I
said so much in my first lecture, making its active entrance on
our scene, and destined to play a part in much that follows. 
Since these experiences of melancholy are in the first instance
absolutely private and individual, I can now help myself out with
personal documents.  Painful indeed they will be to listen to,
and there is almost an indecency in handling them in public.  Yet
they lie right in the middle of our path; and if we are to touch
the psychology of religion at all seriously, we must be willing
to forget conventionalities, and dive below the smooth and lying
official conversational surface.
One can distinguish many kinds of pathological depression.
Sometimes it is mere passive joylessness and dreariness.
discouragement, dejection, lack of taste and zest and spring.
<143> Professor Ribot has proposed the name anhedonia to
designate this condition.
“The state of anhedonia, if I may coin a new word to pair off
with analgesia,” he writes, “has been very little studied, but it
exists.  A young girl was smitten with a liver disease which for
some time altered her constitution.  She felt no longer any
affection for her father and mother.  She would have played with
her doll, but it was impossible to find the least pleasure in the
act. The same things which formerly convulsed her with laughter
entirely failed to interest her now.  Esquirol observed the case
of a very intelligent magistrate who was also a prey to hepatic
disease.  Every emotion appeared dead within him.  He manifested
neither perversion nor violence, but complete absence of
emotional reaction.  If he went to the theatre, which he did out
of habit, he could find no pleasure there.  The thought of his
house of his home, of his wife, and of his absent children moved
him as little, he said, as a theorem of Euclid."[76]
[76] Ribot:  Psychologie des sentiments, p. 54.
Prolonged seasickness will in most persons produce a temporary
condition of anhedonia.  Every good, terrestrial or celestial, is
imagined only to be turned from with disgust. A temporary
condition of this sort, connected with the religious evolution of
a singularly lofty character, both intellectual and moral, is
well described by the Catholic philosopher, Father Gratry, in his
autobiographical recollections. In consequence of mental
isolation and excessive study at the Polytechnic school, young
Gratry fell into a state of nervous exhaustion with symptoms
which he thus describes:–
“I had such a universal terror that I woke at night with a start,
thinking that the Pantheon was tumbling on the Polytechnic
school, or that the school was in flames, or that the Seine was
pouring into the Catacombs, and that Paris was being swallowed  
up.  And when these impressions were past, all day long without
respite I suffered an incurable and intolerable desolation,
verging on despair.  I thought myself, in fact, rejected by God,
lost, damned! I felt something like the suffering of hell. Before
that I had never even thought of hell.  My mind had never turned
in that direction.  Neither discourses nor reflections had
impressed me in that way.  I took no account of hell.  Now, and
all at once, I suffered in a measure what is suffered there.
“But what was perhaps still more dreadful is that every idea of
heaven was taken away from me:  I could no longer conceive of
anything of the sort.  Heaven did not seem to me worth going to. 
It was like a vacuum; a mythological elysium, an abode of shadows
less real than the earth.  I could conceive no joy, no pleasure
in inhabiting it.  Happiness, joy, light, affection, love– all
these words were now devoid of sense.  Without doubt I could
still have talked of all these things, but I had become incapable
of feeling anything in them, of understanding anything about
them, of hoping anything from them, or of believing them to
exist.  There was my great and inconsolable grief! I neither
perceived nor conceived any longer the existence of happiness or
perfection.  An abstract heaven over a naked rock.  Such was my
present abode for eternity."[77]
[77] A. Gratry:  Souvenirs de ma jeunesse, 1880, pp. 119-121,
abridged.  Some persons are affected with anhedonia permanently,
or at any rate with a loss of the usual appetite for life.  The
annals of suicide supply such examples as the following:–
An uneducated domestic servant, aged nineteen, poisons herself,
and leaves two letters expressing her motive for the act.  To her
parents she writes:–
“Life is sweet perhaps to some, but I prefer what is sweeter than
life, and that is death.  So good-by forever, my dear parents. 
It is nobody’s fault, but a strong desire of my own which I have
longed to fulfill for three or four years.  I have always had a
hope that some day I might have an opportunity of fulfilling it,
and now it has come. . . . It is a wonder I have put this off so
long, but I thought perhaps I should cheer up a bit and put all
thought out of my head.”  To her brother she writes:  “Good-by
forever, my own dearest brother.  By the time you get this I
shall be gone forever.  I know, dear love, there is no
forgiveness for what I am going to do. . . . I am tired of
living, so am willing to die. . . .  Life may be sweet to some,
but death to me is sweeter.”  S. A. K. Strahan:  Suicide and
Insanity, 2d edition, London, 1894, p. 131.
So much for melancholy in the sense of incapacity for joyous
feeling.  A much worse form of it is positive and active anguish,
a sort of psychical neuralgia wholly unknown to healthy life. 
Such anguish may partake of various characters, having sometimes
more the quality of loathing; sometimes that of irritation and
exasperation; or again of self-mistrust and self-despair; or of
suspicion, anxiety, trepidation, fear.  The patient may rebel or
submit; may accuse himself, or accuse outside powers; and he may
or he may not be tormented by the theoretical mystery of why he
should so have to suffer.  Most cases are mixed cases, and we
should not treat our classifications with too much respect.
Moreover, it is only a relatively small proportion of cases that
connect themselves with the religious sphere of experience at
all.  Exasperated cases, for instance, as a rule do not.  I quote
now literally from the first case of melancholy on which I lay my
hand.  It is a letter from a patient in a French asylum.
“I suffer too much in this hospital, both physically and morally.
Besides the burnings and the sleeplessness (for I no longer sleep
since I am shut up here, and the little rest I get is broken by
bad dreams, and I am waked with a jump by night mares dreadful
visions, lightning, thunder, and the rest), fear, atrocious fear,
presses me down, holds me without respite, never lets me go. 
Where is the justice in it all!  What have I done to deserve this
excess of severity?  Under what form will this fear crush me? 
What would I not owe to any one who would rid me of my life! Eat,
drink, lie awake all night, suffer without interruption–such is
the fine legacy I have received from my mother!  What I fail to
understand is this abuse of power.  There are limits to
everything, there is a middle way.  But God knows neither middle
way nor limits.  I say God, but why?  All I have known so far has
been the devil.  After all, I am afraid of God as much as of the
devil, so I drift along, thinking of nothing but suicide, but
with neither courage nor means here to execute the act.  As you
read this, it will easily prove to you my insanity.  The style
and the ideas are incoherent enough–I can see that myself.  But
I cannot keep myself from being either crazy or an idiot; and, as
things are, from whom should I ask pity?  I am defenseless
against the invisible enemy who is tightening his coils around
me.  I should be no better armed against him even if I saw him,
or had seen him.  Oh, if he would but kill me, devil take him! 
Death, death, once for all! But I stop. I have raved to you long
enough.  I say raved, for I can write no otherwise, having
neither brain nor thoughts left.  O God! what a misfortune to be
born!  Born like a mushroom, doubtless between an evening and a
morning; and how true and right I was when in our philosophy-year
in college I chewed the cud of bitterness with the pessimists. 
Yes, indeed, there is more pain in life than gladness–it is one
long agony until the grave.  Think how gay it makes me to
remember that this horrible misery of mine, coupled with this
unspeakable fear, may last fifty, one hundred, who knows how many
more years!"[78]
[78] Roubinovitch et Toulouse:  La Melancolie, 1897, p. 170,
abridged.
This letter shows two things.  First, you see how the entire
consciousness of the poor man is so choked with the feeling of
evil that the sense of there being any good in the world is lost
for him altogether.  His attention excludes it, cannot admit it: 
the sun has left his heaven.  And secondly you see how the
querulous temper of his misery keeps his mind from taking a
religious direction.  Querulousness of mind tends in fact rather
towards irreligion; and it has played, so far as I know, no part
whatever in the construction of religious systems.
Religious melancholy must be cast in a more melting mood. 
Tolstoy has left us, in his book called My Confession, a
wonderful account of the attack of melancholy which led him to
his own religious conclusions.  The latter in some respects are
peculiar; but the melancholy presents two characters which make
it a typical document for our present purpose.  First it is a
well-marked case of anhedonia, of passive loss of appetite for
all life’s values; and second, it shows how the altered and
estranged aspect which the world assumed in consequence of this
stimulated Tolstoy’s intellect to a gnawing, carking questioning
and effort for philosophic relief.  I mean to quote Tolstoy at
some length; but before doing so, I will make a general remark on
each of these two points.
First on our spiritual judgments and the sense of value in
general.
It is notorious that facts are compatible with opposite emotional
comments, since the same fact will inspire entirely different
feelings in different persons, and at different times in the same
person; and there is no rationally deducible connection between
any outer fact and the sentiments it may happen to provoke. 
These have their source in another sphere of existence
altogether, in the animal and spiritual region of the subject’s
being.  Conceive yourself, if possible, suddenly stripped of all
the emotion with which your world now inspires you, and try to
imagine it AS IT EXISTS, purely by itself, without your favorable
or unfavorable, hopeful or apprehensive comment.  It will be
almost impossible for you to realize such a condition of
negativity and deadness.  No one portion of the universe would
then have importance beyond another; and the whole collection of
its things and series of its events would be without
significance, character, expression, or perspective.  Whatever of
value, interest, or meaning our respective worlds may appear
endued with are thus pure gifts of the spectator’s mind.  The
passion of love is the most familiar and extreme example of this
fact.  If it comes, it comes; if it does not <148> come, no
process of reasoning can force it.  Yet it transforms the value
of the creature loved as utterly as the sunrise transforms Mont
Blanc from a corpse-like gray to a rosy enchantment; and it sets
the whole world to a new tune for the lover and gives a new issue
to his life.  So with fear, with indignation, jealousy, ambition,
worship.  If they are there, life changes.  And whether they
shall be there or not depends almost always upon non-logical,
often on organic conditions.  And as the excited interest which
these passions put into the world is our gift to the world, just
so are the passions themselves GIFTS–gifts to us, from sources
sometimes low and sometimes high; but almost always nonlogical
and beyond our control.  How can the moribund old man reason back
to himself the romance, the mystery, the imminence of great
things with which our old earth tingled for him in the days when
he was young and well?  Gifts, either of the flesh or of the
spirit; and the spirit bloweth where it listeth; and the world’s
materials lend their surface passively to all the gifts alike, as
the stage-setting receives indifferently whatever alternating
colored lights may be shed upon it from the optical apparatus in
the gallery.
Meanwhile the practically real world for each one of us, the
effective world of the individual, is the compound world, the
physical facts and emotional values in indistinguishable
combination.  Withdraw or pervert either factor of this complex
resultant, and the kind of experience we call pathological
ensues.
In Tolstoy’s case the sense that life had any meaning whatever
was for a time wholly withdrawn.  The result was a transformation
in the whole expression of reality.  When we come to study the
phenomenon of conversion or religious regeneration, we shall see
that a not infrequent consequence of the change operated in the
subject is a transfiguration of the face of nature in his eyes. 
A new heaven seems to shine upon a new earth.  In melancholiacs
there is usually a similar change, only it is in the reverse
direction. The world now looks remote, strange, sinister,
uncanny. Its color is gone, its breath is cold, there is no
speculation in the eyes it glares with.  “It is as if I lived in
another century,” says one asylum patient.–"I see everything
through a cloud,” says another, “things are not as they were, and
I am changed."–"I see,” says a third, “I touch, but the things
do not come near me, a thick veil alters the hue and look of
everything."–"Persons move like shadows, and sounds seem to come
from a distant world."–"There is no longer any past for me;
people appear so strange; it is as if I could not see any
reality, as if I were in a theatre; as if people were actors, and
everything were scenery; I can no longer find myself; I walk, but
why?  Everything floats before my eyes, but leaves no
impression."–"I weep false tears, I have unreal hands:  the
things I see are not real things."–Such are expressions that
naturally rise to the lips of melancholy subjects describing
their changed state.[79]
[79] I cull these examples from the work of G. Dumas:  La
Tristesse et la Joie, 1900.
Now there are some subjects whom all this leaves a prey to the
profoundest astonishment.  The strangeness is wrong.  The
unreality cannot be.  A mystery is concealed, and a metaphysical
solution must exist.  If the natural world is so double-faced and
unhomelike, what world, what thing is real?  An urgent wondering
and questioning is set up, a poring theoretic activity, and in
the desperate effort to get into right relations with the matter,
the sufferer is often led to what becomes for him a satisfying
religious solution.
At about the age of fifty, Tolstoy relates that he began to have
moments of perplexity, of what he calls arrest, as if he knew not
"how to live,” or what to do.  It is obvious that these were
moments in which the excitement and interest which our functions
naturally bring had ceased.  Life had been enchanting, it was now
flat sober, more than <150> sober, dead.  Things were
meaningless whose meaning had always been self-evident.  The
questions “Why?” and “What next?” began to beset him more and
more frequently.  At first it seemed as if such questions must be
answerable, and as if he could easily find the answers if he
would take the time; but as they ever became more urgent, he
perceived that it was like those first discomforts of a sick man,
to which he pays but little attention till they run into one
continuous suffering, and then he realizes that what he took for
a passing disorder means the most momentous thing in the world
for him, means his death.
These questions “Why?” “Wherefore?” “What for?” found no
response.
“I felt,” says Tolstoy, “that something had broken within me on
which my life had always rested, that I had nothing left to hold
on to, and that morally my life had stopped.  An invincible force
impelled me to get rid of my existence, in one way or another. It
cannot be said exactly that I WISHED to kill myself, for the
force which drew me away from life was fuller, more powerful,
more general than any mere desire.  It was a force like my old
aspiration to live, only it impelled me in the opposite
direction. It was an aspiration of my whole being to get out of
life.
“Behold me then, a man happy and in good health, hiding the rope
in order not to hang myself to the rafters of the room where
every night I went to sleep alone; behold me no longer going
shooting, lest I should yield to the too easy temptation of
putting an end to myself with my gun.
“I did not know what I wanted.  I was afraid of life; I was
driven to leave it; and in spite of that I still hoped something
from it.
“All this took place at a time when so far as all my outer
circumstances went, I ought to have been completely happy.  I had
a good wife who loved me and whom I loved; good children and a
large property which was increasing with no pains taken on my
part.  I was more respected by my kinsfolk and acquaintance than
I had ever been; I was loaded with praise by strangers; and
without exaggeration I could believe my name already famous.
Moreover I was neither insane nor ill.  On the contrary, I
possessed a physical and mental strength which I have rarely met
in persons of my age.  I could mow as well as the peasants, I
could work with my brain eight hours uninterruptedly and feel no
bad effects.
“And yet I could give no reasonable meaning to any actions of my
life.  And I was surprised that I had not understood this from
the very beginning.  My state of mind was as if some wicked and
stupid jest was being played upon me by some one.  One can live
only so long as one is intoxicated, drunk with life; but when one
grows sober one cannot fail to see that it is all a stupid cheat.
What is truest about it is that there is nothing even funny or
silly in it; it is cruel and stupid, purely and simply.
“The oriental fable of the traveler surprised in the desert by a
wild beast is very old.
“Seeking to save himself from the fierce animal, the traveler
jumps into a well with no water in it; but at the bottom of this
well he sees a dragon waiting with open mouth to devour him. And
the unhappy man, not daring to go out lest he should be the prey
of the beast, not daring to jump to the bottom lest he should be
devoured by the dragon, clings to the branches of a wild bush
which grows out of one of the cracks of the well.  His hands
weaken, and he feels that he must soon give way to certain fate;
but still he clings, and see two mice, one white, the other
black, evenly moving round the bush to which he hangs, and
gnawing off its roots
“The traveler sees this and knows that he must inevitably perish;
but while thus hanging he looks about him and finds on the leaves
of the bush some drops of honey.  These he reaches with his
tongue and licks them off with rapture.
“Thus I hang upon the boughs of life, knowing that the inevitable
dragon of death is waiting ready to tear me, and I cannot
comprehend why I am thus made a martyr.  I try to suck the honey
which formerly consoled me; but the honey pleases me no longer,
and day and night the white mouse and the black mouse gnaw the
branch to which I cling.  I can see but one thing:  the
inevitable dragon and the mice–I cannot turn my gaze away from
them.
“This is no fable, but the literal incontestable truth which
every one may understand.  What will be the outcome of what I do
to-day?  Of what I shall do to-morrow?  What will be the outcome
of all my life?  Why should I live?  Why should I do anything? 
Is there in life any purpose which the inevitable death which
awaits me does not undo and destroy?
“These questions are the simplest in the world.  From the stupid
child to the wisest old man, they are in the soul of every human
being.  Without an answer to them, it is impossible, as I
experienced, for life to go on.
“’But perhaps,’ I often said to myself, ’there may be something
I have failed to notice or to comprehend.  It is not possible
that this condition of despair should be natural to mankind.’ And
I sought for an explanation in all the branches of knowledge
acquired by men.  I questioned painfully and protractedly and
with no idle curiosity.  I sought, not with indolence, but
laboriously and obstinately for days and nights together.  I
sought like a man who is lost and seeks to save himself–and I
found nothing.  I became convinced, moreover, that all those who
before me had sought for an answer in the sciences have also
found nothing.  And not only this, but that they have recognized
that the very thing which was leading me to despair–the
meaningless absurdity of life–is the only incontestable
knowledge accessible to man.”
To prove this point, Tolstoy quotes the Buddha, Solomon, and
Schopenhauer.  And he finds only four ways in which men of his
own class and society are accustomed to meet the situation. 
Either mere animal blindness, sucking the honey without seeing
the dragon or the mice–"and from such a way,” he says, “I can
learn nothing, after what I now know;” or reflective
epicureanism, snatching what it can while the day lasts–which is
only a more deliberate sort of stupefaction than the first; or
manly suicide; or seeing the mice and dragon and yet weakly and
plaintively clinging to the bush of life.  Suicide was naturally
the consistent course dictated by the logical intellect.
“Yet,” says Tolstoy, “whilst my intellect was working, something
else in me was working too, and kept me from the deed–a
consciousness of life, as I may call it, which was like a force
that obliged my mind to fix itself in another direction and draw
me out of my situation of despair. . . . During the whole course
of this year, when I almost unceasingly kept asking myself how to
end the business, whether by the rope or by the bullet, during
all that time, alongside of all those movements of my ideas and
observations, my heart kept languishing with another pining
emotion.  I can call this by no other name than that of a thirst
for God.  This craving for God had nothing to do with the
movement of my ideas–in fact, it was the direct contrary of that
movement–but it came from my heart.  It was like a feeling of
dread that made me seem like an orphan and isolated in the midst
of all these things that were so foreign.  And this feeling of
dread was mitigated by the hope of finding the assistance of some
one."[80]
[80] My extracts are from the French translation by “Zonia.”   
In abridging I have taken the liberty of transposing one passage.
Of the process, intellectual as well as emotional, which,
starting from this idea of God, led to Tolstoy’s recovery, I will
say nothing in this lecture, reserving it for a later hour. The
only thing that need interest us now is the phenomenon of his
absolute disenchantment with ordinary life, and the fact that the
whole range of habitual values may, to a man as powerful and full
of faculty as he was, come to appear so ghastly a mockery.
When disillusionment has gone as far as this, there is seldom a
restitutio ad integrum.  One has tasted of the fruit of the tree,
and the happiness of Eden never comes again. The happiness that
comes, when any does come–and often enough it fails to return in
an acute form, though its form is sometimes very acute–is not
the simple, ignorance of ill, but something vastly more complex,
including natural evil as one of its elements, but finding
natural evil no such stumbling-block and terror because it now
sees it swallowed up in supernatural good.  The process is one of
redemption, not of mere reversion to natural health, and the
sufferer, when saved, is saved by what seems to him a second
birth, a deeper kind of conscious being than he could enjoy
before.
We find a somewhat different type of religious melancholy
enshrined in literature in John Bunyan’s autobiography. Tolstoy’s
preoccupations were largely objective, for the purpose and
meaning of life in general was what so troubled him; but poor
Bunyan’s troubles were over the condition of his own personal
self.  He was a typical case of the psychopathic temperament,
sensitive of conscience to a diseased degree, beset by doubts,
fears and insistent ideas, and a victim of verbal automatisms,
both motor and sensory. These were usually texts of Scripture
which, sometimes damnatory and sometimes favorable, would come in
a half- hallucinatory form as if they were voices, and fasten on
his mind and buffet it between them like a shuttlecock.  Added to
this were a fearful melancholy self-contempt and despair.
“Nay, thought I, now I grow worse and worse, now I am farther
from conversion than ever I was before.  If now I should have
burned at the stake, I could not believe that Christ had love for
me; alas, I could neither hear him, nor see him, nor feel him,
nor savor any of his things.  Sometimes I would tell my condition
to the people of God, which, when they heard, they would pity me,
and would tell of the Promises.  But they had as good have told
me that I must reach the Sun with my finger as have bidden me
receive or rely upon the Promise. [Yet] all this while as to the
act of sinning, I never was more tender than now; I durst not
take a pin or stick, though but so big as a straw, for my
conscience now was sore, and would smart at every touch; I
could not tell how to speak my words, for fear I should misplace
them.  Oh, how gingerly did I then go, in all I did or said! I
found myself as on a miry bog that shook if I did but stir; and
was as there left both by God and Christ, and the spirit, and all
good things.
“But my original and inward pollution, that was my plague and my
affliction.  By reason of that, I was more loathsome in my own
eyes than was a toad; and I thought I was so in God’s eyes too. 
Sin and corruption, I said, would as naturally bubble out of my
heart as water would bubble out of a fountain.  I could have
changed heart with anybody.  I thought none but the Devil himself
could equal me for inward wickedness and pollution of mind. 
Sure, thought I, I am forsaken of God; and thus I continued a
long while, even for some years together.
“And now I was sorry that God had made me a man.  The beasts,
birds, fishes, etc., I blessed their condition, for they had not
a sinful nature; they were not obnoxious to the wrath of God;
they were not to go to hell-fire after death.  I could therefore
have rejoiced, had my condition been as any of theirs.  Now I
blessed the condition of the dog and toad, yea, gladly would I
have been in the condition of the dog or horse, for I knew they
had no soul to perish under the everlasting weight of Hell or
Sin, as mine was like to do.  Nay, and though I saw this, felt
this, and was broken to pieces with it, yet that which added to
my sorrow was, that I could not find with all my soul that I did
desire deliverance.  My heart was at times exceedingly hard.  If
I would have given a thousand pounds for a tear, I could not shed
one; no, nor sometimes scarce desire to shed one.
“I was both a burthen and a terror to myself; nor did I ever so
know, as now, what it was to be weary of my life, and yet afraid
to die.  How gladly would I have been anything but myself!
Anything but a man! and in any condition but my own."[81]
[81] Grace abounding to the Chief of Sinners:  I have printed a
number of detached passages continuously.
Poor patient Bunyan, like Tolstoy, saw the light again, but we
must also postpone that part of his story to another hour.  In a
later lecture I will also give the end of the
experience of Henry Alline, a devoted evangelist who worked in
Nova Scotia a hundred years ago, and who thus vividly describes
the high-water mark of the religious melancholy which formed its
beginning.  The type was not unlike Bunyan’s.
“Everything I saw seemed to be a burden to me; the earth seemed
accursed for my sake:  all trees, plants, rocks, hills, and vales
seemed to be dressed in mourning and groaning, under the weight
of the curse, and everything around me seemed to be conspiring my
ruin.  My sins seemed to be laid open; so that I thought that
every one I saw knew them, and sometimes I was almost ready to
acknowledge many things, which I thought they knew:  yea
sometimes it seemed to me as if every one was pointing me out as
the most guilty wretch upon earth.  I had now so great a sense of
the vanity and emptiness of all things here below, that I knew
the whole world could not possibly make me happy, no, nor the
whole system of creation.  When I waked in the morning, the first
thought would be, Oh, my wretched soul, what shall I do, where
shall I go?  And when I laid down, would say, I shall be perhaps
in hell before morning. I would many times look on the beasts
with envy, wishing with all my heart I was in their place, that I
might have no soul to lose; and when I have seen birds flying
over my head, have often thought within myself, Oh, that I could
fly away from my danger and distress! Oh, how happy should I be,
if I were in their place!"[82]
[82] The Life and Journal of the Rev. Mr. Henry Alline, Boston
1806, pp. 25, 26.  I owe my acquaintance with this book to my
colleague, Dr. Benjamin Rand.
Envy of the placid beasts seems to be a very widespread affection
in this type of sadness.
The worst kind of melancholy is that which takes the form of
panic fear.  Here is an excellent example, for permission to
print which I have to thank the sufferer.  The original is in
French, and though the subject was evidently in a bad nervous
condition at the time of which he writes, his case has otherwise
the merit of extreme simplicity.  I translate freely.
“Whilst in this state of philosophic pessimism and general
depression of spirits about my prospects, I went one evening into
a dressing-room in the twilight to procure some article that was
there; when suddenly there fell upon me without any warning, just
as if it came out of the darkness, a horrible fear of my own
existence.  Simultaneously there arose in my mind the image of an
epileptic patient whom I had seen in the asylum, a black-haired
youth with greenish skin, entirely idiotic, who used to sit all
day on one of the benches, or rather shelves against the wall,
with his knees drawn up against his chin, and the coarse gray
undershirt, which was his only garment, drawn over them inclosing
his entire figure.  He sat there like a sort of sculptured
Egyptian cat or Peruvian mummy, moving nothing but his black eyes
and looking absolutely non-human.  This image and my fear entered
into a species of combination with each other THAT SHAPE AM I, I
felt, potentially.  Nothing that I possess can defend me against
that fate, if the hour for it should strike for me as it struck
for him.  There was such a horror of him, and such a perception
of my own merely momentary discrepancy from him, that it was as
if something hitherto solid within my breast gave way entirely,
and I became a mass of quivering fear. After this the universe
was changed for me altogether.  I awoke morning after morning
with a horrible dread at the pit of my stomach, and with a sense
of the insecurity of life that I never knew before, and that I
have never felt since.[83] It was like a revelation; and although
the immediate feelings passed away, the experience has made me
sympathetic with the morbid feelings of others ever since.  It
gradually faded, but for months I was unable to go out into the
dark alone.
[83] Compare Bunyan.  “There was I struck into a very great
trembling, insomuch that at some times I could, for days
together, feel my very body, as well as my mind, to shake and
totter under the sense of the dreadful judgment of God, that
should fall on those that have sinned that most fearful and
unpardonable sin.  I felt also such clogging and heat at my
stomach, by reason of this my terror, that I was, especially at
some times, as if my breast-bone would have split asunder. . . . 
Thus did I wind, and twine, and shrink, under the burden that was
upon me; which burden also did so oppress me that I could neither
stand, nor go, nor lie, either at rest or quiet.”
“In general I dreaded to be left alone.  I remember wondering how
other people could live, how I myself had ever lived, so
unconscious of that pit of insecurity beneath the surface of
life.  My mother in particular, a very cheerful person, seemed to
me a perfect paradox in her unconsciousness of danger, which you
may well believe I was very careful not to disturb by revelations
of my own state of mind (I have always thought that this
experience of melancholia of mine had a religious bearing.”
On asking this correspondent to explain more fully what he meant
by these last words, the answer he wrote was this:–
“I mean that the fear was so invasive and powerful that if I had
not clung to scripture-texts like ’The eternal God is my refuge,’
etc., ’Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy-laden,’
etc., ’I am the resurrection and the life,’ etc., I think I
should have grown really insane."[84]
[84] For another case of fear equally sudden, see Henry James: 
Society the Redeemed Form of Man, Boston, 1879, pp. 43 ff.
There is no need of more examples.  The cases we have looked at
are enough.  One of them gives us the vanity of mortal things;
another the sense of sin; and the remaining one describes the
fear of the universe;–and in one or other of these three ways it
always is that man’s original optimism and self-satisfaction get
leveled with the dust.
In none of these cases was there any intellectual insanity or
delusion about matters of fact; but were we disposed to open the
chapter of really insane melancholia, with its <159>
hallucinations and delusions, it would be a worse story
still–desperation absolute and complete, the whole universe
coagulating about the sufferer into a material of overwhelming
horror, surrounding him without opening or end.  Not the
conception or intellectual perception of evil, but the grisly
blood-freezing heart-palsying sensation of it close upon one, and
no other conception or sensation able to live for a moment in its
presence.  How irrelevantly remote seem all our usual refined
optimisms and intellectual and moral consolations in presence of
a need of help like this!  Here is the real core of the religious
problem:  Help! help!  No prophet can claim to bring a final
message unless he says things that will have a sound of reality
in the ears of victims such as these.  But the deliverance must
come in as strong a form as the complaint, if it is to take
effect; and that seems a reason why the coarser religions,
revivalistic, orgiastic, with blood and miracles and supernatural
operations, may possibly never be displaced.  Some constitutions
need them too much.
Arrived at this point, we can see how great an antagonism may
naturally arise between the healthy-minded way of viewing life
and the way that takes all this experience of evil as something
essential.  To this latter way, the morbid-minded way, as we
might call it, healthy-mindedness pure and simple seems
unspeakably blind and shallow.  To the healthy-minded way, on the
other hand, the way of the sick soul seems unmanly and diseased. 
With their grubbing in rat-holes instead of living in the light;
with their manufacture of fears, and preoccupation with every
unwholesome kind of misery, there is something almost obscene
about these children of wrath and cravers of a second birth.  If
religious intolerance and hanging and burning could again become
the order of the day, there is little doubt that, however it may
have been in the past, the healthy-minded would <160> at present
show themselves the less indulgent party of the two.
In our own attitude, not yet abandoned, of impartial onlookers,
what are we to say of this quarrel?  It seems to me that we are
bound to say that morbid-mindedness ranges over the wider scale
of experience, and that its survey is the one that overlaps.  The
method of averting one’s attention from evil, and living simply
in the light of good is splendid as long as it will work.  It
will work with many persons; it will work far more generally than
most of us are ready to suppose; and within the sphere of its
successful operation there is nothing to be said against it as a
religious solution. But it breaks down impotently as soon as
melancholy comes; and even though one be quite free from
melancholy one’s self, there is no doubt that healthy-mindedness
is inadequate as a philosophical doctrine, because the evil facts
which it refuses positively to account for are a genuine portion
of reality; and they may after all be the best key to life’s
significance, and possibly the only openers of our eyes to the
deepest levels of truth.
The normal process of life contains moments as bad as any of
those which insane melancholy is filled with, moments in which
radical evil gets its innings and takes its solid turn.  The
lunatic’s visions of horror are all drawn from the material of
daily fact.  Our civilization is founded on the shambles, and
every individual existence goes out in a lonely spasm of helpless
agony.  If you protest, my friend, wait till you arrive there
yourself!  To believe in the carnivorous reptiles of geologic
times is hard for our imagination–they seem too much like mere
museum specimens.  Yet there is no tooth in any one of those
museum-skulls that did not daily through long years of the
foretime hold fast to the body struggling in despair of some
fated living victim.  Forms of horror just as dreadful to the
victims, if on a smaller spatial scale, fill the world about us
to-day.  Here on our very <161> hearths and in our gardens the
infernal cat plays with the panting mouse, or holds the hot bird
fluttering in her jaws. Crocodiles and rattlesnakes and pythons
are at this moment vessels of life as real as we are; their
loathsome existence fills every minute of every day that drags
its length along; and whenever they or other wild beasts clutch
their living prey, the deadly horror which an agitated
melancholiac feels is the literally right reaction on the
situation.[85]
[85] Example:  “It was about eleven o’clock at night . . . but I
strolled on still with the people. . . . Suddenly upon the left
side of our road, a crackling was heard among the bushes; all of
us were alarmed, and in an instant a tiger, rushing out of the
jungle, pounced upon the one of the party that was foremost, and
carried him off in the twinkling of an eye.  The rush of the
animal, and the crush of the poor victim’s bones in his mouth,
and his last cry of distress, ’Ho hai!’ involuntarily reechoed by
all of us, was over in three seconds; and then I know not what
happened till I returned to my senses, when I found myself and
companions lying down on the ground as if prepared to be devoured
by our enemy the sovereign of the forest.  I find my pen
incapable of describing the terror of that dreadful moment.  Our
limbs stiffened, our power of speech ceased, and our hearts beat
violently, and only a whisper of the same ’Ho hai!’ was heard
from us.  In this state we crept on all fours for some distance
back, and then ran for life with the speed of an Arab horse for
about half an hour, and fortunately happened to come to a small
village. . . . After this every one of us was attacked with
fever, attended with shivering, in which deplorable state we
remained till morning."–Autobiography of Lutullah a Mohammedan
Gentleman, Leipzig, 1857, p. 112.
It may indeed be that no religious reconciliation with the
absolute totality of things is possible.  Some evils, indeed, are
ministerial to higher forms of good; but it may be that there are
forms of evil so extreme as to enter into no good system
whatsoever, and that, in respect of such evil, dumb submission or
neglect to notice is the only practical resource.  This question
must confront us on a later day.  But provisionally, and as a
mere matter of program and method, since the evil facts are as
genuine parts of nature as the good ones, the philosophic
presumption should be that they have some rational significance,
and that systematic healthy-mindedness, failing as it does to
accord to sorrow, pain, and death any positive and active
attention whatever, is formally less complete than systems
that try at least to include these elements in their scope.
The completest religions would therefore seem to be those in
which the pessimistic elements are best developed.  Buddhism, of
course, and Christianity are the best known to us of these.  They
are essentially religions of deliverance:  the man must die to an
unreal life before he can be born into the real life.  In my next
lecture, I will try to discuss some of the psychological
conditions of this second birth.  Fortunately from now onward we
shall have to deal with more cheerful subjects than those which
we have recently been dwelling on.
The last lecture was a painful one, dealing as it did with evil
as a pervasive element of the world we live in.  At the close of
it we were brought into full view of the contrast between the two
ways of looking at life which are characteristic respectively of
what we called the healthy-minded, who need to be born only once,
and of the sick souls, who must be twice-born in order to be
happy.  The result is two different conceptions of the universe
of our experience.  In the religion of the once-born the world is
a sort of rectilinear or one-storied affair, whose accounts are
kept in one denomination, whose parts have just the values which
naturally they appear to have, and of which a simple algebraic
sum of pluses and minuses will give the total worth.  Happiness
and religious peace consist in living on the plus side of the
account. In the religion of the twice-born, on the other hand,
the world is a double-storied mystery.  Peace cannot be reached
by the simple addition of pluses and elimination of minuses from
life.  Natural good is not simply insufficient in amount and
transient, there lurks a falsity in its very being. Cancelled as
it all is by death if not by earlier enemies, it gives no final
balance, and can never be the thing intended for our lasting
worship. It keeps us from our real good, rather; and renunciation
and despair of it are our first step in the direction of the
truth.  There are two lives, the natural and the spiritual, and
we must lose the one before we can participate in the other.
 
In their extreme forms, of pure naturalism and pure salvationism,
the two types are violently contrasted; though here as in most
other current classifications, the radical extremes are somewhat
ideal abstractions, and the concrete human beings whom we
oftenest meet are intermediate varieties and mixtures. 
Practically, however, you all recognize the difference:  you
understand, for example, the disdain of the methodist convert for
the mere sky-blue healthy-minded moralist; and you likewise enter
into the aversion of the latter to what seems to him the diseased
subjectivism of the Methodist, dying to live, as he calls it, and
making of paradox and the inversion of natural appearances the
essence of God’s truth.[86]
[86] E.g., “Our young people are diseased with the theological
problems of original sin, origin of evil, predestination, and the
like. These never presented a practical difficulty to any
man–never darkened across any man’s road, who did not go out of
his way to seek them.  These are the soul’s mumps, and measles,
and whooping-coughs, etc.  Emerson:  Spiritual Laws.
The psychological basis of the twice-born character seems to be a
certain discordancy or heterogeneity in the native temperament of
the subject, an incompletely unified moral and intellectual
constitution.
“Homo duplex, homo duplex!” writes Alphonse Daudet. “The first
time that I perceived that I was two was at the death of my
brother Henri, when my father cried out so dramatically, ’He is
dead, he is dead!’  While my first self wept, my second self
thought, ’How truly given was that cry, how fine it would be at
the theatre.’  I was then fourteen years old.
“This horrible duality has often given me matter for reflection.
Oh, this terrible second me, always seated whilst the other is on
foot, acting, living, suffering, bestirring itself.  This second
me that I have never been able to intoxicate, to make shed tears,
or put to sleep. And how it sees into things, and how it
mocks!"[87]
[87] Notes sur la Vie, p. 1.
Recent works on the psychology of character have had much to say
upon this point.[88] Some persons are born with an inner
constitution which is harmonious and well balanced from the
outset.  Their impulses are consistent with one another, their
will follows without trouble the guidance of their intellect,
their passions are not excessive, and their lives are little
haunted by regrets.  Others are oppositely constituted; and are
so in degrees which may vary from something so slight as to
result in a merely odd or whimsical inconsistency, to a
discordancy of which the consequences may be inconvenient in the
extreme.  Of the more innocent kinds of heterogeneity I find a
good example in Mrs. Annie Besant’s autobiography.
[88] See, for example, F. Paulhan, in his book Les Caracteres,
1894, who contrasts les Equilibres, les Unifies, with les
Inquiets, les Contrariants, les Incoherents, les Emiettes, as so
many diverse psychic types.
“I have ever been the queerest mixture of weakness and strength,
and have paid heavily for the weakness.  As a child I used to
suffer tortures of shyness, and if my shoe-lace was untied would
feel shamefacedly that every eye was fixed on the unlucky string;
as a girl I would shrink away from strangers and think myself
unwanted and unliked, so that I was full of eager gratitude to
any one who noticed me kindly, as the young mistress of a house I
was afraid of my servants, and would let careless work pass
rather than bear the pain of reproving the ill-doer; when I have
been lecturing and debating with no lack of spirit on the
platform, I have preferred to go without what I wanted at the
hotel rather than to ring and make the waiter fetch it. 
Combative on the platform in defense of any cause I cared for, I
shrink from quarrel or disapproval in the house, and am a coward
at heart in private while a good fighter in public.  How often
have I passed unhappy quarters of an hour screwing up my courage
to find fault with some subordinate whom my duty compelled me to
reprove, and how often have I jeered myself for a fraud as the
doughty platform combatant, when shrinking from blaming some lad
or lass for doing their work badly.  An unkind look or word has
availed to make me shrink into myself as a snail into its shell,
while, on the platform, opposition makes me speak my best."[89]
[89] Annie Besant:  an Autobiography, p. 82.
This amount of inconsistency will only count as amiable weakness;
but a stronger degree of heterogeneity may make havoc of the
subject’s life.  There are persons whose existence is little more
than a series of zig-zags, as now one tendency and now another
gets the upper hand.  Their spirit wars with their flesh, they
wish for incompatibles, wayward impulses interrupt their most
deliberate plans, and their lives are one long drama of
repentance and of effort to repair misdemeanors and mistakes.
Heterogeneous personality has been explained as the result of
inheritance–the traits of character of incompatible and
antagonistic ancestors are supposed to be preserved alongside of
each other.[90] This explanation may pass for what it is
worth–it certainly needs corroboration.  But whatever the cause
of heterogeneous personality may be, we find the extreme examples
of it in the psychopathic temperament, of which I spoke in my
first lecture.  All writers about that temperament make the inner
heterogeneity prominent in their descriptions.  Frequently,
indeed, it is only this trait that leads us to ascribe that
temperament to a man at all.  A “degenere superieur” is simply a
man of sensibility in many directions, who finds more difficulty
than is common in keeping <167> his spiritual house in order and
running his furrow straight, because his feelings and impulses
are too keen and too discrepant mutually.  In the haunting and
insistent ideas, in the irrational impulses, the morbid scruples,
dreads, and inhibitions which beset the psychopathic temperament
when it is thoroughly pronounced, we have exquisite examples of
heterogeneous personality.  Bunyan had an obsession of the words,
"Sell Christ for this, sell him for that, sell him, sell him!"
which would run through his mind a hundred times together, until
one day out of breath with retorting, “I will not, I will not,"
he impulsively said, “Let him go if he will,” and this loss of
the battle kept him in despair for over a year.  The lives of the
saints are full of such blasphemous obsessions, ascribed
invariably to the direct agency of Satan.  The phenomenon
connects itself with the life of the subconscious self,
so-called, of which we must erelong speak more directly.
[90] Smith Baker, in Journal of Nervous and Mental Diseases,
September, 1893.
Now in all of us, however constituted, but to a degree the
greater in proportion as we are intense and sensitive and subject
to diversified temptations, and to the greatest possible degree
if we are decidedly psychopathic, does the normal evolution of
character chiefly consist in the straightening out and unifying
of the inner self.  The higher and the lower feelings, the useful
and the erring impulses, begin by being a comparative chaos
within us–they must end by forming a stable system of functions
in right subordination.  Unhappiness is apt to characterize the
period of order-making and struggle.  If the individual be of
tender conscience and religiously quickened, the unhappiness will
take the form of moral remorse and compunction, of feeling
inwardly vile and wrong, and of standing in false relations to
the author of one’s being and appointer of one’s spiritual fate. 
This is the religious melancholy and “conviction of sin” that
have played so large a part in the history of Protestant
Christianity.  The man’s interior is a battle-ground for what he
feels to be two deadly hostile selves, one actual, the other
ideal.  As Victor Hugo makes his Mahomet say:–
     “Je suis le champ vil des sublimes combats:
     Tantot l’homme d’en haut, et tantot l’homme d’en bas;
     Et le mal dans ma bouche avec le bien alterne,
     Comme dans le desert le sable et la citerne.”
Wrong living, impotent aspirations; “What I would, that do I not;
but what I hate, that do I,” as Saint Paul says; self-loathing,
self-despair; an unintelligible and intolerable burden to which
one is mysteriously the heir.
Let me quote from some typical cases of discordant personality,
with melancholy in the form of self-condemnation and sense of
sin.  Saint Augustine’s case is a classic example.  You all
remember his half-pagan, half-Christian bringing up at Carthage,
his emigration to Rome and Milan, his adoption of Manicheism and
subsequent skepticism, and his restless search for truth and
purity of life; and finally how, distracted by the struggle
between the two souls in his breast and ashamed of his own
weakness of will, when so many others whom he knew and knew of
had thrown off the shackles of sensuality and dedicated
themselves to chastity and the higher life, he heard a voice in
the garden say, “Sume, lege” (take and read), and opening the
Bible at random, saw the text, “not in chambering and
wantonness,” etc., which seemed directly sent to his address, and
laid the inner storm to rest forever.[91] Augustine’s
psychological genius has given an account of the trouble of
having a divided self which has never been surpassed.
[91] Louis Gourdon (Essai sur la Conversion de Saint Augustine,
Paris, Fischbacher, 1900) has shown by an analysis of Augustine’s
writings immediately after the date of his conversion (A. D. 386)
that the account he gives in the Confessions is premature.  The
crisis in the garden marked a definitive conversion from his
former life, but it was to the neo-platonic spiritualism and only
a halfway stage toward Christianity.  The latter he appears not
fully and radically to have embraced until four years more had
passed.
“The new will which I began to have was not yet strong enough to
overcome that other will, strengthened by long indulgence. So
these two wills, one old, one new, one carnal, the other
spiritual, contended with each other and disturbed my soul.  I
understood by my own experience what I had read, ’flesh lusteth
against spirit, and spirit against flesh.’ It was myself indeed
in both the wills, yet more myself in that which I approved in
myself than in that which I disapproved in myself.  Yet it was
through myself that habit had attained so fierce a mastery over
me, because I had willingly come whither I willed not.  Still
bound to earth, I refused, O God, to fight on thy side, as much
afraid to be freed from all bonds, as I ought to have feared
being trammeled by them.
“Thus the thoughts by which I meditated upon thee were like the
efforts of one who would awake, but being overpowered with
sleepiness is soon asleep again.  Often does a man when heavy
sleepiness is on his limbs defer to shake it off, and though not
approving it, encourage it; even so I was sure it was better to
surrender to thy love than to yield to my own lusts, yet though
the former course convinced me, the latter pleased and held me
bound.  There was naught in me to answer thy call ’Awake, thou
sleeper,’ but only drawling, drowsy words, ’Presently; yes,
presently; wait a little while.’  But the ’presently’ had no
’present,’ and the ’little while’ grew long. . . .  For I was
afraid thou wouldst hear me too soon, and heal me at once of my
disease of lust, which I wished to satiate rather than to see
extinguished.  With what lashes of words did I not scourge my own
soul.  Yet it shrank back; it refused, though it had no excuse to
offer. . . . I said within myself:  ’Come, let it be done now,’
and as I said it, I was on the point of the resolve.  I all but
did it, yet I did not do it.  And I made another effort, and
almost succeeded, yet I did not reach it, and did not grasp it,
hesitating to die to death, and live to life, and the evil to
which I was so wonted held me more than the better life I had not
tried."[92]
[92] Confessions, Book VIII., Chaps. v., vii., xi., abridged.
There could be no more perfect description of the divided will,
when the higher wishes lack just that last acuteness, that touch
of explosive intensity, of dynamogenic quality (to use the slang
of the psychologists), that enables them to burst their shell,
and make irruption efficaciously into life and quell the lower
tendencies forever.  In a later lecture we shall have much to say
about this higher excitability.
I find another good description of the divided will in the
autobiography of Henry Alline, the Nova Scotian evangelist, of
whose melancholy I read a brief account in my last lecture.  The
poor youth’s sins were, as you will see, of the most harmless
order, yet they interfered with what proved to be his truest
vocation, so they gave him great distress.
“I was now very moral in my life, but found no rest of
conscience.  I now began to be esteemed in young company, who
knew nothing of my mind all this while, and their esteem began to
be a snare to my soul, for I soon began to be fond of carnal
mirth, though I still flattered myself that if I did not get
drunk, nor curse, nor swear, there would be no sin in frolicking
and carnal mirth, and I thought God would indulge young people
with some (what I called simple or civil) recreation.  I still
kept a round of duties, and would not suffer myself to run into
any open vices, and so got along very well in time of health and
prosperity, but when I was distressed or threatened by sickness,
death, or heavy storms of thunder, my religion would not do, and
I found there was something wanting, and would begin to repent my
going so much to frolics, but when the distress was over, the
devil and my own wicked heart, with the solicitations of my
associates, and my fondness for young company, were such strong
allurements, I would again give way, and thus I got to be very
wild and rude, at the same time kept up my rounds of secret
prayer and reading; but God, not willing I should destroy myself,
still followed me with his calls, and moved with such power upon
my conscience, that I could not satisfy myself with my
diversions, and in the midst of my mirth sometimes would have
such a sense of my lost and undone condition, that I would wish
myself from the company, and after it was over, when I went home,
would make many promises that I would attend no more on these
frolics, and would beg forgiveness for hours and hours; but when
I came to have the temptation again, I would give way:  no
sooner would I hear the music and drink a glass of wine, but I
would find my mind elevated and soon proceed to any sort of
merriment or diversion, that I thought was not debauched or
openly vicious; but when I returned from my carnal mirth I felt
as guilty as ever, and could sometimes not close my eyes for some
hours after I had gone to my bed.  I was one of the most unhappy
creatures on earth.
“Sometimes I would leave the company (often speaking to the
fiddler to cease from playing, as if I was tired), and go out and
walk about crying and praying, as if my very heart would break,
and beseeching God that he would not cut me off, nor give me up
to hardness of heart.  Oh, what unhappy hours and nights I thus
wore away!  When I met sometimes with merry companions, and my
heart was ready to sink, I would labor to put on as cheerful a
countenance as possible, that they might not distrust anything,
and sometimes would begin some discourse with young men or young
women on purpose, or propose a merry song, lest the distress of
my soul would be discovered, or mistrusted, when at the same time
I would then rather have been in a wilderness in exile, than with
them or any of their pleasures or enjoyments.  Thus for many
months when I was in company?  I would act the hypocrite and
feign a merry heart but at the same time would endeavor as much
as I could to shun their company, oh wretched and unhappy mortal
that I was!  Everything I did, and wherever I went, I was still
in a storm and yet I continued to be the chief contriver and
ringleader of the frolics for many months after; though it was a
toil and torment to attend them; but the devil and my own wicked
heart drove me about like a slave, telling me that I must do this
and do that, and bear this and bear that, and turn here and turn
there, to keep my credit up, and retain the esteem of my
associates:  and all this while I continued as strict as possible
in my duties, and left no stone unturned to pacify my conscience,
watching even against my thoughts, and praying continually
wherever I went:  for I did not think there was any sin in my
conduct, when I was among carnal company, because I did not take
any satisfaction there, but only followed it, I thought, for
sufficient reasons.
“But still, all that I did or could do, conscience would roar
night and day.”
Saint Augustine and Alline both emerged into the smooth waters of
inner unity and peace, and I shall next ask you to consider more
closely some of the peculiarities of the process of unification,
when it occurs.  It may come gradually, or it may occur abruptly;
it may come through altered feelings, or through altered powers
of action; or it may come through new intellectual insights, or
through experiences which we shall later have to designate as
’mystical.’  However it come, it brings a characteristic sort of
relief; and never such extreme relief as when it is cast into the
religious mould.  Happiness! happiness! religion is only one of
the ways in which men gain that gift.  Easily, permanently, and
successfully, it often transforms the most intolerable misery
into the profoundest and most enduring happiness.
But to find religion is only one out of many ways of reaching
unity; and the process of remedying inner incompleteness and
reducing inner discord is a general psychological process, which
may take place with any sort of mental material, and need not
necessarily assume the religious form.  In judging of the
religious types of regeneration which we are about to study, it
is important to recognize that they are only one species of a
genus that contains other types as well.  For example, the new
birth may be away from religion into incredulity; or it may be
from moral scrupulosity into freedom and license; or it may be
produced by the irruption into the individual’s life of some new
stimulus or passion, such as love, ambition, cupidity, revenge,
or patriotic devotion.  In all these instances we have precisely
the same psychological form of event,–a firmness, stability, and
equilibrium <173> succeeding a period of storm and stress and
inconsistency.  In these non-religious cases the new man may also
be born either gradually or suddenly.
The French philosopher Jouffroy has left an eloquent memorial of
his own “counter-conversion,” as the transition from orthodoxy to
infidelity has been well styled by Mr. Starbuck.  Jouffroy’s
doubts had long harassed him; but he dates his final crisis from
a certain night when his disbelief grew fixed and stable, and
where the immediate result was sadness at the illusions he had
lost.
“I shall never forget that night of December,” writes Jouffroy,
"in which the veil that concealed from me my own incredulity was
torn.  I hear again my steps in that narrow naked chamber where
long after the hour of sleep had come I had the habit of walking
up and down.  I see again that moon, half-veiled by clouds,
which now and again illuminated the frigid window-panes.  The
hours of the night flowed on and I did not note their passage. 
Anxiously I followed my thoughts, as from layer to layer they
descended towards the foundation of my consciousness, and,
scattering one by one all the illusions which until then had
screened its windings from my view, made them every moment more
clearly visible.
“Vainly I clung to these last beliefs as a shipwrecked sailor
clings to the fragments of his vessel; vainly, frightened at the
unknown void in which I was about to float, I turned with them
towards my childhood, my family, my country, all that was dear
and sacred to me:  the inflexible current of my thought was too
strong–parents, family, memory, beliefs, it forced me to let go
of everything.  The investigation went on more obstinate and more
severe as it drew near its term, and did not stop until the end
was reached.  I knew then that in the depth of my mind nothing
was left that stood erect.
“This moment was a frightful one; and when towards morning I
threw myself exhausted on my bed, I seemed to feel my earlier
life, so smiling and so full, go out like a fire, and before me
another life opened, sombre and unpeopled, where in future I must
live alone, alone with my fatal thought which had exiled me
thither, and which I was tempted to curse.  The days which
followed this discovery were the saddest of my life."[93]
[93] Th. Jouffroy:  Nouveaux Melanges philosophiques, 2me
edition, p. 83.  I add two other cases of counter-conversion
dating from a certain moment.  The first is from Professor
Starbuck’s manuscript collection, and the narrator is a woman.
“Away down in the bottom of my heart, I believe I was always more
or less skeptical about ’God;’ skepticism grew as an
undercurrent, all through my early youth, but it was controlled
and covered by the emotional elements in my religious growth. 
When I was sixteen I joined the church and was asked if I loved
God.  I replied ’Yes,’ as was customary and expected.  But
instantly with a flash something spoke within me, ’No, you do
not.’  I was haunted for a long time with shame and remorse for
my falsehood and for my wickedness in not loving God, mingled
with fear that there might be an avenging God who would punish me
in some terrible way. . . . At nineteen, I had an attack of
tonsilitis.  Before I had quite recovered, I heard told a story
of a brute who had kicked his wife down-stairs, and then
continued the operation until she became insensible.  I felt the
horror of the thing keenly.  Instantly this thought flashed
through my mind:  ’I have no use for a God who permits such
things.’  This experience was followed by months of stoical
indifference to the God of my previous life, mingled with
feelings of positive dislike and a somewhat proud defiance of
him.  I still thought there might be a God.  If so he would
probably damn me, but I should have to stand it.  I felt very
little fear and no desire to propitiate him.  I have never had
any personal relations with him since this painful experience.”
The second case exemplifies how small an additional stimulus will
overthrow the mind into a new state of equilibrium when the
process of preparation and incubation has proceeded far enough. 
It is like the proverbial last straw added to the camel’s burden,
or that touch of a needle which makes the salt in a
supersaturated fluid suddenly begin to crystallize out.
Tolstoy writes:  “S., a frank and intelligent man, told me as
follows how he ceased to believe:–
“He was twenty-six years old when one day on a hunting
expedition, the time for sleep having come, he set himself to
pray according to the custom he had held from childhood.
“His brother, who was hunting with him, lay upon the hay and
looked at him.  When S. had finished his prayer and was turning
to sleep, the brother said, ’Do you still keep up that thing?’
Nothing more was said.  But since that day, now more than thirty
years ago, S.  has never prayed again; he never takes communion,
and does not go to church.  All this, not because he became
acquainted with convictions of his brother which he then and
there adopted; not because he made any new resolution in his
soul, but merely because the words spoken by his brother were
like the light push of a finger against a leaning wall already
about to tumble by its own weight.  These words but showed him
that the place wherein he supposed religion dwelt in him had long
been empty, and that the sentences he uttered, the crosses and
bows which he made during his prayer, were actions with no inner
sense.  Having once seized their absurdity, he could no longer
keep them up.”    Ma Confession, p. 8.
I subjoin an additional document which has come into my
possession, and which represents in a vivid way what is probably
a very frequent sort of conversion, if the opposite of ’falling
in love,’ falling out of love, may be so termed.  Falling in love
also conforms frequently to this type, a latent process of
unconscious preparation often preceding a sudden awakening to the
fact that the mischief is irretrievably done.  The free and easy
tone in this narrative gives it a sincerity that speaks for
itself.
“For two years of this time I went through a very bad experience,
which almost drove me mad.  I had fallen violently in love with a
girl who, young as she was, had a spirit of coquetry like a cat.
As I look back on her now, I hate her, and wonder how I could
ever have fallen so low as to be worked upon to such an extent by
her attractions.  Nevertheless, I fell into a regular fever,
could think of nothing else; whenever I was alone, I pictured her
attractions, and spent most of the time when I should have been
working, in recalling our previous interviews, and imagining
future conversations.  She was very pretty, good humored, and
jolly to the last degree, and intensely pleased with my
admiration.  Would give me no decided answer yes or no and the
queer thing about it was that whilst pursuing her for her hand, I
secretly knew all along that she was unfit to be a wife for me,
and that she never would say yes.  Although for a year we took
our meals at the same boarding-house, so that I saw her
continually and familiarly, our closer relations had to be
largely on the sly, and this fact, together with my jealousy of
another one of her male admirers and my own conscience despising
me for my uncontrollable weakness, made me so nervous and
sleepless that I really thought I should become insane.  I
understand well those young men murdering their sweethearts,
which appear so often in the papers.  Nevertheless I did love her
passionately, and in some ways she did deserve it.
“The queer thing was the sudden and unexpected way in which it
all stopped.  I was going to my work after breakfast one morning,
thinking as usual of her and of my misery, when, just as if some
outside power laid hold of me, I found myself turning round and
almost running to my room, where I immediately got out all the
relics of her which I possessed, including some hair, all her
notes and letters and ambrotypes on glass.  The former I made a
fire of, the latter I actually crushed beneath my heel, in a sort
of fierce joy of revenge and punishment.  I now loathed and
despised her altogether, and as for myself I felt as if a load of
disease had suddenly been removed from me.  That was the end.  I
never spoke to her or wrote to her again in all the subsequent
years, and I have never had a single moment of loving thought
towards one for so many months entirely filled my heart.  In
fact, I have always rather hated her memory, though now I can see
that I had gone unnecessarily far in that direction.  At any
rate, from that happy morning onward I regained possession of my
own proper soul, and have never since fallen into any similar
trap.”
This seems to me an unusually clear example of two different
levels of personality, inconsistent in their dictates, yet so
well balanced against each other as for a long time to fill the
life with discord and dissatisfaction.  At last, not gradually,
but in a sudden crisis, the unstable equilibrium is resolved, and
this happens so unexpectedly that it is as if, to use the
writer’s words, “some outside power laid hold.”
Professor Starbuck gives an analogous case, and a converse case
of hatred suddenly turning into love, in his Psychology of
Religion, p. 141.  Compare the other highly curious instances
which he gives on pp. 137-144, of sudden non-religious
alterations of habit or character. He seems right in conceiving
all such sudden changes as results of special cerebral functions
unconsciously developing until they are ready to play a
controlling part when they make irruption into the conscious
life.  When we treat of sudden ’conversion,’ I shall make as much
use as I can of this hypothesis of subconscious incubation. 
<175> In John Foster’s Essay on Decision of Character, there is
an account of a case of sudden conversion to avarice, which is
illustrative enough to quote:–
A young man, it appears, “wasted, in two or three years, a large
patrimony in profligate revels with a number of worthless
associates who called themselves his friends, and who, when his
last means were exhausted, treated him of course with neglect or
contempt.  Reduced to absolute want, he one day went out of the
house with an intention to put an end to his life, but wandering
awhile almost unconsciously, he came to the brow of an eminence
which overlooked what were lately his estates.  Here he sat down,
and remained fixed in thought a number of hours, at the end of
which he sprang from the ground with a vehement, exulting
emotion.  He had formed his resolution, which was, that all these
estates should be his again; he had formed his plan, too, which
he instantly began to execute.  He walked hastily forward,
determined to seize the first opportunity, of however humble a
kind, to gain any money, though it were ever so despicable a
trifle, and resolved absolutely not to spend, if he could help
it, a farthing of whatever he might obtain.  The first thing that
drew his attention was a heap of coals shot out of carts on the
pavement before a house.  He offered himself to shovel or wheel
them into the place where they were to be laid, and was employed.
He received a few pence for the labor; and then, in pursuance of
the saving part of his plan requested some small gratuity of meat
and drink, which was given <176> him.  He then looked out for
the next thing that might chance; and went, with indefatigable
industry, through a succession of servile employments in
different places, of longer and shorter duration, still
scrupulous in avoiding, as far as possible, the expense of a
penny.  He promptly seized every opportunity which could advance
his design, without regarding the meanness of occupation or
appearance.  By this method he had gained, after a considerable
time, money enough to purchase in order to sell again a few
cattle, of which he had taken pains to understand the value.  He
speedily but cautiously turned his first gains into second
advantages; retained without a single deviation his extreme
parsimony; and thus advanced by degrees into larger transactions
and incipient wealth.  I did not hear, or have forgotten, the
continued course of his life, but the final result was, that he
more than recovered his lost possessions, and died an inveterate
miser, worth L60,000."[94]
[94] Op. cit., Letter III., abridged.
Let me turn now to the kind of case, the religious case, namely,
that immediately concerns us.  Here is one of the simplest
possible type, an account of the conversion to the systematic
religion of healthy-mindedness of a man who must already have
been naturally of the healthy-minded type.  It shows how, when
the fruit is ripe, a touch will make it fall.
Mr. Horace Fletcher, in his little book called Menticulture,
relates that a friend with whom he was talking of the
self-control attained by the Japanese through their practice of
the Buddhist discipline said:–
“’You must first get rid of anger and worry.’  ’But,’ said I,
’is that possible?’  ’Yes,’ replied he; ’it is possible to the
Japanese, and ought to be possible to us.’
“On my way back I could think of nothing else but the words get
rid, get rid’; and the idea must have continued to possess me
during my sleeping hours, for the first consciousness in the
morning brought back the same thought, with the revelation of a
discovery, which framed itself into the reasoning, ’If it is
possible to get rid of anger and worry, why is it necessary to
have them at all?’  I felt the strength of the argument, and at
once accepted the reasoning.  The baby had discovered that it
could walk.  It would scorn to creep any longer.
“From the instant I realized that these cancer spots of worry and
anger were removable, they left me.  With the discovery of their
weakness they were exorcised.  From that time life has had an
entirely different aspect.
“Although from that moment the possibility and desirability of
freedom from the depressing passions has been a reality to me, it
took me some months to feel absolute security in my new position;
but, as the usual occasions for worry and anger have presented
themselves over and over again, and I have been unable to feel
them in the slightest degree, I no longer dread or guard against
them, and I am amazed at my increased energy and vigor of mind,
at my strength to meet situations of all kinds and at my
disposition to love and appreciate everything.
“I have had occasion to travel more than ten thousand miles by
rail since that morning.  The same Pullman porter, conductor,
hotel-waiter, peddler, book-agent, cabman, and others who were
formerly a source of annoyance and irritation have been met, but
I am not conscious of a single incivility.  All at once the whole
world has turned good to me.  I have become, as it were,
sensitive only to the rays of good.
“I could recount many experiences which prove a brand-new
condition of mind, but one will be sufficient.  Without the
slightest feeling of annoyance or impatience, I have seen a train
that I had planned to take with a good deal of interested and
pleasurable anticipation move out of the station without me,
because my baggage did not arrive.  The porter from the hotel
came running and panting into the station just as the train
pulled out of sight.  When he saw me, he looked as if he feared a
scolding. and began to tell of being blocked in a crowded street
and unable to get out.  When he had finished, I said to him:  ’It
doesn’t matter at all, you couldn’t help it, so we will try again
to-morrow.  Here is your fee, I am sorry you had all this trouble
in earning it.’  The look of surprise that came over his face was
so filled with pleasure that I was repaid on the spot for the
delay in my departure.  Next day he would not accept a cent for
the service, and he and I are friends for life.
“During the first weeks of my experience I was on guard only
against worry and anger; but, in the mean time, having noticed
the absence of the other depressing and dwarfing passions, I
began to trace a relationship, until I was convinced that they
are all growths from the two roots I have specified.  I have felt
the freedom now for so long a time that I am sure of my relation
toward it; and I could no more harbor any of the thieving and
depressing influences that once I nursed as a heritage of
humanity than a fop would voluntarily wallow in a filthy gutter.
“There is no doubt in my mind that pure Christianity and pure
Buddhism, and the Mental Sciences and all Religions fundamentally
teach what has been a discovery to me; but none of them have
presented it in the light of a simple and easy process of
elimination.  At one time I wondered if the elimination would not
yield to indifference and sloth.  In my experience, the contrary
is the result.  I feel such an increased desire to do something
useful that it seems as if I were a boy again and the energy for
play had returned.  I could fight as readily as (and better than)
ever, if there were occasion for it.  It does not make one a
coward.  It can’t, since fear is one of the things eliminated.  I
notice the absence of timidity in the presence of any audience. 
When a boy, I was standing under a tree which was struck by
lightning, and received a shock from the effects of which I never
knew exemption until I had dissolved partnership with worry. 
Since then, lightning and thunder have been encountered under
conditions which would formerly have caused great depression and
discomfort, without [my] experiencing a trace of either. 
Surprise is also greatly modified, and one is less liable to
become startled by unexpected sights or noises.
“As far as I am individually concerned, I am not bothering myself
at present as to what the results of this emancipated condition
may be.  I have no doubt that the perfect health aimed at by
Christian Science may be one of the possibilities, for I note a
marked improvement in the way my stomach does its duty in
assimilating the food I give it to handle, and I am sure it works
better to the sound of a song than under the friction of a frown.
Neither am I wasting any of this precious time formulating an
idea of a future existence or a future Heaven.  The Heaven that I
have within myself is as attractive as any that has been promised
or that I can imagine; and I am willing to let the growth lead
where it will, as long as the anger and their brood have no part
in misguiding it."[95]
[95] H. Fletcher:  Menticulture, or the A-B-C of True Living, New
York and Chicago, 1899, pp. 26, 36, abridged.
The older medicine used to speak of two ways, lysis and crisis,
one gradual, the other abrupt, in which one might recover from a
bodily disease.  In the spiritual realm there are also two ways,
one gradual, the other sudden, in which inner unification may
occur.  Tolstoy and Bunyan may again serve us as examples,
examples, as it happens, of the gradual way, though it must be
confessed at the outset that it is hard to follow these windings
of the hearts of others, and one feels that their words do not
reveal their total secret.
Howe’er this be, Tolstoy, pursuing his unending questioning,
<181> seemed to come to one insight after another.  First he
perceived that his conviction that life was meaningless took only
this finite life into account.  He was looking for the value of
one finite term in that of another, and the whole result could
only be one of those indeterminate equations in mathematics which
end with infinity.  Yet this is as far as the reasoning intellect
by itself can go, unless irrational sentiment or faith brings in
the infinite.  Believe in the infinite as common people do, and
life grows possible again.
“Since mankind has existed, wherever life has been, there also
has been the faith that gave the possibility of living.  Faith is
the sense of life, that sense by virtue of which man does not
destroy himself, but continues to live on.  It is the force
whereby we live. If Man did not believe that he must live for
something, he would not live at all.  The idea of an infinite
God, of the divinity of the soul, of the union of men’s actions
with God–these are ideas elaborated in the infinite secret
depths of human thought.  They are ideas without which there
would be no life, without which I myself,” said Tolstoy, “would
not exist.  I began to see that I had no right to rely on my
individual reasoning and neglect these answers given by faith,
for they are the only answers to the question.”
Yet how believe as the common people believe, steeped as they are
in grossest superstition?  It is impossible–but yet their life!
their life! It is normal.  It is happy!  It is an answer to the
question!
Little by little, Tolstoy came to the settled conviction–he says
it took him two years to arrive there–that his trouble had not
been with life in general, not with the common life of common
men, but with the life of the upper, intellectual, artistic
classes, the life which he had personally always led, the
cerebral life, the life of conventionality, artificiality, and
personal ambition.  He had been living wrongly and must change. 
To work for animal needs, to abjure lies and vanities, to relieve
common wants, to be simple, to believe in God, therein lay
happiness again.
“I remember,” he says, “one day in early spring, I was alone in
the forest, lending my ear to its mysterious noises.  I listened,
and my thought went back to what for these three years it always
was busy with–the quest of God.  But the idea of him, I said,
how did I ever come by the idea?
“And again there arose in me, with this thought, glad aspirations
towards life.  Everything in me awoke and received a meaning.  . 
. .Why do I look farther?  a voice within me asked.  He is there:
he, without whom one cannot live.  To acknowledge God and to live
are one and the same thing.  God is what life is.  Well, then!
live, seek God, and there will be no life without him. . . .
“After this, things cleared up within me and about me better than
ever, and the light has never wholly died away.  I was saved from
suicide.  Just how or when the change took place I cannot tell. 
But as insensibly and gradually as the force of life had been
annulled within me, and I had reached my moral death-bed, just as
gradually and imperceptibly did the energy of life come back. 
And what was strange was that this energy that came back was
nothing new.  It was my ancient juvenile force of faith, the
belief that the sole purpose of my life was to be BETTER.   I
gave up the life of the conventional world, recognizing it to be
no life, but a parody on life, which its superfluities simply
keep us from comprehending,"–and Tolstoy thereupon embraced the
life of the peasants, and has felt right and happy, or at least
relatively so, ever since.[96]
[96] I have considerably abridged Tolstoy’s words in my
translation.
As I interpret his melancholy, then, it was not merely an
accidental vitiation of his humors, though it was doubtless also
that.  It was logically called for by the clash between his inner
character and his outer activities and aims.  Although a literary
artist, Tolstoy was one of those primitive oaks of men to whom
the superfluities and insincerities, the cupidities,
complications, and cruelties of our polite civilization are
profoundly unsatisfying, and for whom the eternal veracities lie
with more natural and animal things.  His crisis was the getting
of his soul in order, the discovery of its genuine habitat and
vocation, the escape from falsehoods into what for him were ways
of truth.  It was a case of heterogeneous personality tardily and
slowly finding its unity and level. And though not many of us can
imitate Tolstoy, not having enough, perhaps, of the aboriginal
human marrow in our bones, most of us may at least feel as if it
might be better for us if we could.
Bunyan’s recovery seems to have been even slower.  For years
together he was alternately haunted with texts of Scripture, now
up and now down, but at last with an ever growing relief in his
salvation through the blood of Christ.
“My peace would be in and out twenty times a day; comfort now and
trouble presently; peace now and before I could go a furlong as
full of guilt and fear as ever heart could hold.”  When a good
text comes home to him, “This,” he writes, “gave me good
encouragement for the space of two or three hours"; or “This was
a good day to me, I hope I shall not forget it”, or “The glory of
these words was then so weighty on me that I was ready to swoon
as I sat; yet, not with grief and trouble, but with solid joy and
peace"; or “This made a strange seizure on my spirit; it brought
light with it, and commanded a silence in my heart of all those
tumultuous thoughts that before did use, like masterless
hell-hounds, to roar and bellow and make a hideous noise within
me.  It showed me that Jesus Christ had not quite forsaken and
cast off my Soul.”
Such periods accumulate until he can write:  “And now remained
only the hinder part of the tempest, for the thunder was gone
beyond me, only some drops would still remain, that now and then
would fall upon me";–and at last:  “Now did my chains fall off
my legs indeed; I was loosed from my afflictions and irons; my
temptations also fled away; so that from that time, those
dreadful Scriptures of God left off to trouble me; now went I
also home rejoicing, for the grace and love of God. . . . Now
could I see myself in Heaven and Earth at once; in Heaven by my
Christ, by my Head, by my Righteousness and Life, though on
Earth by my body or person. . . .  Christ was a precious Christ
to my soul that night; I could scarce lie in my bed for joy and
peace and triumph through Christ.”
Bunyan became a minister of the gospel, and in spite of his
neurotic constitution, and of the twelve years he lay in prison
for his non-conformity, his life was turned to active use.  He
was a peacemaker and doer of good, and the immortal Allegory
which he wrote has brought the very spirit of religious patience
home to English hearts.
But neither Bunyan nor Tolstoy could become what we have called
healthy-minded.  They had drunk too deeply of the cup of
bitterness ever to forget its taste, and their redemption is into
a universe two stories deep.  Each of them realized a good which
broke the effective edge of his sadness; yet the sadness was
preserved as a minor ingredient in the heart of the faith by
which it was overcome.  The fact of interest for us is that as a
matter of fact they could and did find SOMETHING welling up in
the inner reaches of their consciousness, by which such extreme
sadness could be overcome.  Tolstoy does well to talk of it as
THAT BY WHICH MEN LIVE; for that is exactly what it is, a
stimulus, an excitement, a faith, a force that re-infuses the
positive willingness to live, even in full presence of the evil
perceptions that erewhile made life seem unbearable.  For
Tolstoy’s perceptions of evil appear within their sphere to have
remained unmodified.  His later works show him implacable to the
whole system of official values:  the ignobility of fashionable
life; the infamies of empire; the spuriousness of the church, the
vain conceit of the professions; the meannesses and cruelties
that go with great success; and every other pompous crime and
lying institution of this world.  To all patience with such
things his experience has been for him a perroanent ministry of
death.
Bunyan also leaves this world to the enemy.
“I must first pass a sentence of death,” he says, “upon
everything that can properly be called a thing of this life, even
to reckon myself, my wife, my children, my health, my enjoyments,
and all, as dead to me, and myself as dead to them; to trust in
God through Christ, as touching the world to come, and as
touching this world, to count the grave my house, to make my bed
in darkness, and to say to corruption, Thou art my father and to
the worm, Thou art my mother and sister. . . .  The parting with
my wife and my poor children hath often been to me as the pulling
of my flesh from my bones, especially my poor blind child who lay
nearer my heart than all I had besides.  Poor child, thought I,
what sorrow art thou like to have for thy portion in this world!
Thou must be beaten, must beg, suffer hunger, cold, nakedness,
and a thousand calamities, though I cannot now endure that the
wind should blow upon thee.  But yet I must venture you all with
God, though it goeth to the quick to leave you."[97]
[97] In my quotations from Bunyan I have omitted certain
intervening portions of the text.
The “hue of resolution” is there, but the full flood of ecstatic
liberation seems never to have poured over poor John Bunyan’s
soul.
These examples may suffice to acquaint us in a general way with
the phenomenon technically called “Conversion.”  In the next
lecture I shall invite you to study its peculiarities and
concomitants in some detail.
To be converted, to be regenerated, to receive grace, to
experience religion, to gain an assurance, are so many phrases
which denote the process, gradual or sudden, by which a self
hitherto divided, and consciously wrong inferior and unhappy,
becomes unified and consciously right superior and happy, in
consequence of its firmer hold upon religious realities.  This at
least is what conversion signifies in general terms, whether or
not we believe that a direct divine operation is needed to bring
such a moral change about.
Before entering upon a minuter study of the process, let me
enliven our understanding of the definition by a concrete
example.  I choose the quaint case of an unlettered man, Stephen
H. Bradley, whose experience is related in a scarce American
pamphlet.[98]
[98] A sketch of the life of Stephen H. Bradley, from the age of
five to twenty four years, including his remarkable experience of
the power of the Holy Spirit on the second evening of November,
1829. Madison, Connecticut, 1830.
I select this case because it shows how in these inner
alterations one may find one unsuspected depth below another, as
if the possibilities of character lay disposed in a series of
layers or shells, of whose existence we have no premonitory
knowledge.
Bradley thought that he had been already fully converted at the
age of fourteen.
“I thought I saw the Saviour, by faith, in human shape, for about
one second in the room, with arms extended, appearing to say to
me, Come.  The next day I rejoiced with trembling; soon after, my
happiness was so great that I said that I wanted to die; this
world had no place in my affections, as I knew of, and every day
appeared as solemn to me as the Sabbath.  I had an ardent desire
that all mankind might feel as I did; I wanted to have them all
love God supremely.  Previous to this time I was very selfish and
self-righteous; but now I desired the welfare of all mankind, and
could with a feeling heart forgive my worst enemies, and I felt
as if I should be willing to bear the scoffs and sneers of any
person, and suffer anything for His sake, if I could be the means
in the hands of God, of the conversion of one soul.”
Nine years later, in 1829, Mr. Bradley heard of a revival of
religion that had begun in his neighborhood.  “Many of the young
converts,” he says, “would come to me when in meeting and ask me
if I had religion, and my reply generally was, I hope I have. 
This did not appear to satisfy them; they said they KNEW THEY had
it.  I requested them to pray for me, thinking with myself, that
if I had not got religion now, after so long a time professing to
be a Christian, that it was time I had, and hoped their prayers
would be answered in my behalf.
“One Sabbath, I went to hear the Methodist at the Academy. He
spoke of the ushering in of the day of general judgment; and he
set it forth in such a solemn and terrible manner as I never
heard before.  The scene of that day appeared to be taking place,
and so awakened were all the powers of my mind that, like Felix,
I trembled involuntarily on the bench where I was sitting, though
I felt nothing at heart.  The next day evening I went to hear him
again.  He took his text from Revelation:  ’And I saw the dead,
small and great, stand before God.’  And he represented the
terrors of that day in such a manner that it appeared as if it
would melt the heart of stone.  When he finished his discourse,
an old gentleman turned to me and said ’This is what I call
preaching.’  I thought the same, but my feelings were still
unmoved by what he said, and I did not enjoy religion, but I
believe he did.
“I will now relate my experience of the power of the Holy Spirit
which took place on the same night.  Had any person told 
me previous to this that I could have experienced the power of
the Holy Spirit in the manner which I did, I could not have
believed it, and should have thought the person deluded that told
me so.  I went directly home after the meeting, and when I got
home I wondered what made me feel so stupid.  I retired to rest
soon after I got home, and felt indifferent to the things of
religion until I began to be exercised by the Holy Spirit, which
began in about five minutes after, in the following manner:–
“At first, I began to feel my heart beat very quick all on a
sudden, which made me at first think that perhaps something is
going to ail me, though I was not alarmed, for I felt no pain. 
My heart increased in its beating, which soon convinced me that
it was the Holy Spirit from the effect it had on me.  I began to
feel exceedingly happy and humble, and such a sense of
unworthiness as I never felt before.  I could not very well help
speaking out, which I did, and said, Lord, I do not deserve this
happiness, or words to that effect, while there was a stream
(resembling air in feeling) came into my mouth and heart in a
more sensible manner than that of drinking anything, which
continued, as near as I could judge, five minutes or more, which
appeared to be the cause of such a palpitation of my heart.  It
took complete possession of my soul, and I am certain that I
desired the Lord, while in the midst of it, not to give me any
more happiness, for it seemed as if I could not contain what I
had got.  My heart seemed as if it would burst, but it did not
stop until I felt as if I was unutterably full of the love and
grace of God.  In the mean time while thus exercised, a thought
arose in my mind, what can it mean?  and all at once, as if to
answer it, my memory became exceedingly clear, and it appeared to
me just as if the New Testament was placed open before me, eighth
chapter of Romans, and as light as if some candle lighted was
held for me to read the 26th and 27th verses of that chapter, and
I read these words:  ’The Spirit helpeth our infirmities with
groanings which cannot be uttered.’  And all the time that my
heart was a-beating, it made me groan like a person in distress,
which was not very easy to stop, though I was in no pain at all,
and my brother being in bed in another room came and opened the
door, and asked me if I had got the toothache.  I told him no, 
and that he might get to sleep. I tried to stop.  I felt
unwilling to go to sleep myself, I was so happy, fearing I should
lose it– thinking within myself
          ’My willing soul would stay
           In such a frame as this.’
And while I lay reflecting, after my heart stopped beating,
feeling as if my soul was full of the Holy Spirit, I thought that
perhaps there might be angels hovering round my bed.  I felt just
as if I wanted to converse with them, and finally I spoke, saying
’O ye affectionate angels! how is it that ye can take so much
interest in our welfare, and we take so little interest in our
own.’  After this, with difficulty I got to sleep; and when I
awoke in the morning my first thoughts were:  What has become of
my happiness?  and, feeling a degree of it in my heart, I asked
for more, which was given to me as quick as thought.  I then got
up to dress myself, and found to my surprise that I could but
just stand.  It appeared to me as if it was a little heaven upon
earth.  My soul felt as completely raised above the fears of
death as of going to sleep; and like a bird in a cage, I had a
desire, if it was the will of God, to get released from my body
and to dwell with Christ, though willing to live to do good to
others, and to warn sinners to repent.  I went downstairs feeling
as solemn as if I had lost all my friends, and thinking with
myself, that I would not let my parents know it until I had first
looked into the Testament.  I went directly to the shelf and
looked into it, at the eighth of Romans, and every verse seemed
to almost speak and to confirm it to be truly the Word of God,
and as if my feelings corresponded with the meaning of the word. 
I then told my parents of it, and told them that I thought that
they must see that when I spoke, that it was not my own voice,
for it appeared so to me.  My speech seemed entirely under the
control of the Spirit within me; I do not mean that the words
which I spoke were not my own, for they were.  I thought that I
was influenced similar to the Apostles on the day of Pentecost
(with the exception of having power to give it to others, and
doing what they did).  After breakfast I went round to converse
with my neighbors on religion, which I could not have been 
hired to have done before this, and at their request I prayed
with them, though I had never prayed in public before.
“I now feel as if I had discharged my duty by telling the truth,
and hope by the blessing of God, it may do some good to all who
shall read it.  He has fulfilled his promise in sending the Holy
Spirit down into our hearts, or mine at least, and I now defy all
the Deists and Atheists in the world to shake my faith in
Christ.”
So much for Mr. Bradley and his conversion, of the effect of
which upon his later life we gain no information.  Now for a
minuter survey of the constituent elements of the conversion
process.
If you open the chapter on Association, of any treatise on
Psychology, you will read that a man’s ideas, aims, and objects
form diverse internal groups and systems, relatively independent
of one another.  Each ’aim’ which he follows awakens a certain
specific kind of interested excitement, and gathers a certain
group of ideas together in subordination to it as its associates;
and if the aims and excitements are distinct in kind, their
groups of ideas may have little in common.  When one group is
present and engrosses the interest, all the ideas connected with
other groups may be excluded from the mental field.  The
President of the United States when, with paddle, gun, and
fishing-rod, he goes camping in the wilderness for a vacation,
changes his system of ideas from top to bottom.  The presidential
anxieties have lapsed into the background entirely; the official
habits are replaced by the habits of a son of nature, and those
who knew the man only as the strenuous magistrate would not “know
him for the same person” if they saw him as the camper.
If now he should never go back, and never again suffer political
interests to gain dominion over him, he would be for practical
intents and purposes a permanently transformed being.  Our
ordinary alterations of character, as we pass from one of our
aims to another, are not commonly called transformations, because
each of them is so rapidly succeeded by another in the reverse
direction; but whenever one aim grows so stable as to expel
definitively its previous rivals from the individual’s life, we
tend to speak of the phenomenon, and perhaps to wonder at it, as
a “transformation.”
These alternations are the completest of the ways in which a self
may be divided.  A less complete way is the simultaneous
coexistence of two or more different groups of aims, of which one
practically holds the right of way and instigates activity,
whilst the others are only pious wishes, and never practically
come to anything.  Saint Augustine’s aspirations to a purer life,
in our last lecture, were for a while an example.  Another would
be the President in his full pride of office, wondering whether
it were not all vanity, and whether the life of a wood-chopper
were not the wholesomer destiny.  Such fleeting aspirations are
mere velleitates, whimsies.  They exist on the remoter outskirts
of the mind, and the real self of the man, the centre of his
energies, is occupied with an entirely different system.  As life
goes on, there is a constant change of our interests, and a
consequent change of place in our systems of ideas, from more
central to more peripheral, and from more peripheral to more
central parts of consciousness.  I remember, for instance, that
one evening when I was a youth, my father read aloud from a
Boston newspaper that part of Lord Gifford’s will which founded
these four lectureships.  At that time I did not think of being a
teacher of philosophy, and what I listened to was as remote from
my own life as if it related to the planet Mars.  Yet here I am,
with the Gifford system part and parcel of my very self, and all
my energies, for the time being, devoted to successfully
identifying myself with it.  My soul stands now planted in what
once was for it a practically unreal object, and speaks from it
as from its proper habitat and centre.
When I say “Soul,” you need not take me in the ontological sense
unless you prefer to; for although ontological language is
instinctive in such matters, yet Buddhists or Humians can
perfectly well describe the facts in the phenomenal terms which
are their favorites.  For them the soul is only a succession of
fields of consciousness:  yet there is found in each field a
part, or sub-field, which figures as focal and contains the
excitement, and from which, as from a centre, the aim seems to be
taken.  Talking of this part, we involuntarily apply words of
perspective to distinguish it from the rest, words like “here,"
"this,” “now,” “mine,” or “me"; and we ascribe to the other parts
the positions “there,” “then,” “that,” “his” or “thine,” “it,"
"not me.”  But a “here” can change to a “there,” and a “there"
become a “here,” and what was “mine” and what was “not mine"
change their places.
What brings such changes about is the way in which emotional
excitement alters.  Things hot and vital to us to-day are cold
to-morrow.  It is as if seen from the hot parts of the field that
the other parts appear to us, and from these hot parts personal
desire and volition make their sallies.  They are in short the
centres of our dynamic energy, whereas the cold parts leave us
indifferent and passive in proportion to their coldness.
Whether such language be rigorously exact is for the present of
no importance.  It is exact enough, if you recognize from your
own experience the facts which I seek to designate by it.
Now there may be great oscillation in the emotional interest, and
the hot places may shift before one almost as rapidly as the
sparks that run through burnt-up paper.  Then we have the
wavering and divided self we heard so much of in the previous
lecture.  Or the focus of excitement and heat, the point of view
from which the aim is taken, may come to lie permanently within a
certain system; and then, if the change be a religious one, we
call it a CONVERSION, especially if it be by crisis, or sudden.
Let us hereafter, in speaking of the hot place in a man’s
consciousness, the group of ideas to which he devotes himself,
and from which he works, call it THE HABITUAL CENTRE OF HIS
PERSONAL ENERGY.  It makes a great difference to a man whether
one set of his ideas, or another, be the centre of his energy;
and it makes a great difference, as regards any set of ideas
which he may possess, whether they become central or remain
peripheral in him.  To say that a man is “converted” means, in
these terms, that religious ideas, previously peripheral in his
consciousness, now take a central place, and that religious aims
form the habitual centre of his energy.
Now if you ask of psychology just HOW the excitement shifts in a
man’s mental system, and WHY aims that were peripheral become at
a certain moment central, psychology has to reply that although
she can give a general description of what happens, she is unable
in a given case to account accurately for all the single forces
at work.  Neither an outside observer nor the Subject who
undergoes the process can explain fully how particular
experiences are able to change one’s centre of energy so
decisively, or why they so often have to bide their hour to do
so.  We have a thought, or we perform an act, repeatedly, but on
a certain day the real meaning of the thought peals through us
for the first time, or the act has suddenly turned into a moral
impossibility.  All we know is that there are dead feelings, dead
ideas, and cold beliefs, and there are hot and live ones; and
when one grows hot and alive within us, everything has to
re-crystallize about it.  We may say that the heat and liveliness
mean only the “motor efficacy,” long deferred but now operative,
of the idea; but such talk itself is only circumlocution, for
whence the sudden motor efficacy?  And our explanations then get
so vague and general that one realizes all the more the intense
individuality of the whole phenomenon.
In the end we fall back on the hackneyed symbolism of a
mechanical equilibrium.  A mind is a system of ideas, each with
the excitement it arouses, and with tendencies impulsive and
inhibitive, which mutually check or reinforce one another.  The
collection of ideas alters by subtraction or by addition in the
course of experience, and the tendencies alter as the organism
gets more aged.  A mental system may be undermined or weakened by
this interstitial alteration just as a building is, and yet for a
time keep upright by dead habit.  But a new perception, a sudden
emotional shock, or an occasion which lays bare the organic
alteration, will make the whole fabric fall together; and then
the centre of gravity sinks into an attitude more stable, for the
new ideas that reach the centre in the rearrangement seem now to
be locked there, and the new structure remains permanent.
Formed associations of ideas and habits are usually factors of
retardation in such changes of equilibrium.  New information,
however acquired, plays an accelerating part in the changes; and
the slow mutation of our instincts and propensities, under the
"unimaginable touch of time” has an enormous influence. 
Moreover, all these influences may work subconsciously or half
unconsciously.[99] And when you get a Subject in whom the
subconscious life–of which I must speak more fully soon–is
largely developed, and in whom motives habitually ripen in
silence, you get a case of which you can never give a full
account, and in which, both to the Subject and the onlookers,
there may appear an element of marvel.  Emotional occasions,
especially violent ones, are extremely potent in precipitating
mental rearrangements.  The sudden and explosive ways in which
love, jealousy, guilt, fear, remorse, or anger can seize upon one
are known to everybody.[100]  Hope, happiness, security, resolve,
emotions characteristic of conversion, can be equally explosive. 
And emotions that come in this explosive way seldom leave things
as they found them.
[99] Jouffroy is an example:  “Down this slope it was that my
intelligence had glided, and little by little it had got far from
its first faith.  But this melancholy revolution had not taken
place in the broad daylight of my consciousness; too many
scruples, too many guides and sacred affections had made it
dreadful to me, so that I was far from avowing to myself the
progress it had made.  It had gone on in silence, by an
involuntary elaboration of which I was not the accomplice; and
although I had in reality long ceased to be a Christian, yet, in
the innocence of my intention, I should have shuddered to suspect
it, and thought it calumny had I been accused of such a falling
away.”  Then follows Jouffroy’s account of his
counter-conversion, quoted above on p. 173.
[100] One hardly needs examples; but for love, see p. 176, note,
for fear, p. 161 ; for remorse, see Othello after the murder;
for anger see Lear after Cordelia’s first speech to him; for
resolve, see p. 175 (J. Foster case).  Here is a pathological
case in which GUILT was the feeling that suddenly exploded:  “One
night I was seized on entering bed with a rigor, such as
Swedenborg describes as coming over him with a sense of holiness,
but over me with a sense of GUILT. During that whole night I lay
under the influence of the rigor, and from its inception I felt
that I was under the curse of God.  I have never done one act of
duty in my life–sins against God and man beginning as far as my
memory goes back–a wildcat in human shape.”
In his recent work on the Psychology of Religion, Professor
Starbuck of California has shown by a statistical inquiry how
closely parallel in its manifestations the ordinary “conversion"
which occurs in young people brought up in evangelical circles is
to that growth into a larger spiritual life which is a normal
phase of adolescence in every class of human beings.  The age is
the same, falling usually between fourteen and seventeen.  The
symptoms are the same,–sense of incompleteness and imperfection;
brooding, depression, morbid introspection, and sense of sin;
anxiety about the hereafter; distress over doubts, and the like. 
And the result is the same–a happy relief and objectivity, as
the confidence in self gets greater through the adjustment of the
faculties to the wider outlook.  In spontaneous religious
awakening, apart from revivalistic examples, and in the ordinary
storm and stress and moulting-time of adolescence, we also may
meet with mystical experiences, astonishing the subjects by their
suddenness, just as in revivalistic conversion.  The analogy, in
fact, is complete; and Starbuck’s conclusion as to these ordinary
youthful conversions would seem to be the only sound one: 
Conversion is in its essence a normal adolescent phenomenon,
incidental to the passage from the child’s small universe to the
wider intellectual and spiritual life of maturity.
“Theology,” says Dr. Starbuck, “takes the adolescent tendencies
and builds upon them; it sees that the essential thing in
adolescent growth is bringing the person out of childhood into
the new life of maturity and personal insight.  It accordingly
brings those means to bear which will intensify the normal
tendencies.  It shortens up the period of duration of storm and
stress.”  The conversion phenomena of “conviction of sin” last,
by this investigator’s statistics, about one fifth as long as the
periods of adolescent storm and stress phenomena of which he also
got statistics, but they are very much more intense.  Bodily
accompaniments, loss of sleep and appetite, for example, are much
more frequent in them.  “The essential distinction appears to be
that conversion intensifies but shortens the period by bringing
the person to a definite crisis."[101]
[101] E. D. Starbuck:  The Psychology of Religion, pp. 224, 262.
The conversions which Dr. Starbuck here has in mind are of course
mainly those of very commonplace persons, kept true to a
pre-appointed type by instruction, appeal, and example. The
particular form which they affect is the result of suggestion and
imitation.[102] If they went through their growth-crisis in other
faiths and other countries, although the essence of the change
would be the same (since it is one in the main so inevitable),
its accidents would be different. In Catholic lands, for example,
and in our own Episcopalian sects, no such anxiety and conviction
of sin is usual as in sects that encourage revivals.  The
sacraments being more relied on in these more strictly
ecclesiastical bodies, the individual’s personal acceptance of
salvation needs less to be accentuated and led up to.
[102] No one understands this better than Jonathan Edwards
understood it already.  Conversion narratives of the more
commonplace sort must always be taken with the allowances which
he suggests:
“A rule received and established by common consent has a very
great, though to many persons an insensible influence in forming
their notions of the process of their own experience.  I know
very well how they proceed as to this matter, for I have had
frequent opportunities of observing their conduct.  Very often
their experience at first appears like a confused chaos, but then
those parts are selected which bear the nearest resemblance to
such particular steps as are insisted on; and these are dwelt
upon in their thoughts, and spoken of from time to time, till
they grow more and more conspicuous in their view, and other
parts which are neglected grow more and more obscure.  Thus what
they have experienced is insensibly strained, so as to bring it
to an exact conformity to the scheme already established in their
minds.  And it becomes natural also for ministers, who have to
deal with those who insist upon distinctness and clearness of
method, to do so too.”  Treatise on Religious Affections.
But every imitative phenomenon must once have had its original,
and I propose that for the future we keep as close as may be to
the more first-hand and original forms of experience.  These are
more likely to be found in sporadic adult cases.
Professor Leuba, in a valuable article on the psychology of
conversion,[103] subordinates the theological aspect of the
religious life almost entirely to its moral aspect.  The
religious sense he defines as “the feeling of unwholeness, of
moral imperfection, of sin, to use the technical word,
accompanied by the yearning after the peace of unity.”  “The word
’religion,’” he says, “is getting more and more to signify the
conglomerate of desires and emotions springing from the sense of
sin and its release"; and he gives a large number of examples, in
which the sin ranges from drunkenness to spiritual pride, to show
that the sense of it may beset one and crave relief as urgently
as does the anguish of the sickened flesh or any form of physical
misery.
[103] Studies in the Psychology of Religious Phenomena, American
Journal of Psychology, vii. 309 (1896).
Undoubtedly this conception covers an immense number of cases.  A
good one to use as an example is that of Mr. S. H. Hadley, who
after his conversion became an active and useful rescuer of
drunkards in New York.  His experience runs as follows:–
“One Tuesday evening I sat in a saloon in Harlem, a homeless,
friendless, dying drunkard.  I had pawned or sold everything that
would bring a drink.  I could not sleep unless I was dead drunk. 
I had not eaten for days, and for four nights preceding I had
suffered with delirium tremens, or the horrors, from midnight
till morning.  I had often said, ’I will never be a tramp.  I
will never be cornered, for when that time comes, if ever it
comes, I will find a home in the bottom of the river.’  But the
Lord so ordered it that when that time did come I was not able to
walk one quarter of the way to the river.  As I sat there
thinking, I seemed to feel some great and mighty presence.  I did
not know then what it was.  I did learn afterwards that it was
Jesus, the sinner’s friend.  I walked up to the bar and pounded
it with my fist till I made the glasses rattle.  Those who stood
by drinking looked on with scornful curiosity.  I said I would
never take another drink, if I died on the street, and really I
felt as though that would happen before morning.  Something said,
’If you want to keep this promise, go and have yourself locked
up.’  I went to the nearest station-house and had myself locked
up.
“I was placed in a narrow cell, and it seemed as though all the
demons that could find room came in that place with me.  This was
not all the company I had, either.  No, praise the Lord:  that
dear Spirit that came to me in the saloon was present, and
said, Pray.  I did pray, and though I did not feel any great
help, I kept on praying.  As soon as I was able to leave my cell
I was taken to the police court and remanded back to the cell.  I
was finally released, and found my way to my brother’s house,
where every care was given me.  While lying in bed the
admonishing Spirit never left me, and when I arose the following
Sabbath morning I felt that day would decide my fate, and toward
evening it came into my head to go to Jerry M’Auley’s Mission.  I
went.  The house was packed, and with great difficulty I made my
way to the space near the platform.  There I saw the apostle to
the drunkard and the outcast–that man of God, Jerry M’Auley.  He
rose, and amid deep silence told his experience.  There was a
sincerity about this man that carried conviction with it, and I
found myself saying, ’I wonder if God can save me?’  I listened
to the testimony of twenty-five or thirty persons, every one of
whom had been saved from rum, and I made up my mind that I would
be saved or die right there.  When the invitation was given, I
knelt down with a crowd of drunkards.  Jerry made the first
prayer.  Then Mrs. M’Auley prayed fervently for us.  Oh, what a
conflict was going on for my poor soul!  A blessed whisper said,
’Come’; the devil said, ’Be careful.’  I halted but a moment, and
then, with a breaking heart, I said, ’Dear Jesus, can you help
me?’  Never with mortal tongue can I describe that moment. 
Although up to that moment my soul had been filled with
indescribable gloom, I felt the glorious brightness of the
noonday sun shine into my heart.  I felt I was a free man.  Oh,
the precious feeling of safety, of freedom, of resting on Jesus!
I felt that Christ with all his brightness and power had come
into my life; that, indeed, old things had passed away and all
things had become new.
“From that moment till now I have never wanted a drink of
whiskey, and I have never seen money enough to make me take one. 
I promised God that night that if he would take away the appetite
for strong drink, I would work for him all my life.  He has done
his part, and I have been trying to do mine."[104]
[104] I have abridged Mr. Hadley’s account.  For other
conversions of drunkards, see his pamphlet, Rescue Mission Work,
published at the Old Jerry M’Auley Water Street Mission, New York
City.  A striking collection of cases also appears in the
appendix to Professor Leuba’s article.
<200> Dr. Leuba rightly remarks that there is little doctrinal
theology in such an experience, which starts with the absolute
need of a higher helper, and ends with the sense that he has
helped us.  He gives other cases of drunkards’ conversions which
are purely ethical, containing, as recorded, no theological
beliefs whatever.  John B. Gough’s case, for instance, is
practically, says Dr. Leuba, the conversion of an
atheist–neither God nor Jesus being mentioned.[105] But in spite
of the importance of this type of regeneration, with little or no
intellectual readjustment, this writer surely makes it too
exclusive.  It corresponds to the subjectively centered form of
morbid melancholy, of which Bunyan and Alline were examples.  But
we saw in our seventh lecture that there are objective forms of
melancholy also, in which the lack of rational meaning of the
universe, and of life anyhow, is the burden that weighs upon
one–you remember Tolstoy’s case.[106] So there are distinct
elements in conversion, and their relations to individual lives
deserve to be discriminated.[107]
[105] A restaurant waiter served provisionally as Gough’s
’Saviour.’  General Booth, the founder of the Salvation Army,
considers that the first vital step in saving outcasts consists
in making them feel that some decent human being cares enough for
them to take an interest in the question whether they are to rise
or sink.
[106] The crisis of apathetic melancholy–no use in life–into
which J. S. Mill records that he fell, from which he emerged by
the reading of Marmontel’s Memoirs (Heaven save the mark!) and
Wordsworth’s poetry, is another intellectual and general
metaphysical case. See Mill’s Autobiography, New York, 1873, pp.
141, 148.
[107] Starbuck, in addition to “escape from sin,” discriminates
"spiritual illumination” as a distinct type of conversion
experience. Psychology of Religion, p. 85.
Some persons, for instance, never are, and possibly never under
any circumstances could be, converted.  Religious ideas cannot
become the centre of their spiritual energy.  They may be
excellent persons, servants of God in practical ways, but they
are not children of his kingdom.  They are either incapable of
imagining the invisible; or else, in the language of devotion,
they are life-long subjects of “barrenness” and “dryness.”   
Such inaptitude for religious faith may in some cases be
intellectual in its origin.  Their religious faculties may be
checked in their natural tendency to expand, by beliefs about the
world that are inhibitive, the pessimistic and materialistic
beliefs, for example, within which so many good souls, who in
former times would have freely indulged their religious
propensities, find themselves nowadays, as it were, frozen; or
the agnostic vetoes upon faith as something weak and shameful,
under which so many of us today lie cowering, afraid to use our
instincts.  In many persons such inhibitions are never overcome. 
To the end of their days they refuse to believe, their personal
energy never gets to its religious centre, and the latter remains
inactive in perpetuity.
In other persons the trouble is profounder.  There are men
anaesthetic on the religious side, deficient in that category of
sensibility.  Just as a bloodless organism can never, in spite of
all its goodwill, attain to the reckless “animal spirits” enjoyed
by those of sanguine temperament; so the nature which is
spiritually barren may admire and envy faith in others, but can
never compass the enthusiasm and peace which those who are
temperamentally qualified for faith enjoy.  All this may,
however, turn out eventually to have been a matter of temporary
inhibition.  Even late in life some thaw, some release may take
place, some bolt be shot back in the barrenest breast, and the
man’s hard heart may soften and break into religious feeling. 
Such cases more than any others suggest the idea that sudden
conversion is by miracle.  So long as they exist, we must not
imagine ourselves to deal with irretrievably fixed classes. 
Now there are two forms of mental occurrence in human beings,
which lead to a striking difference in the conversion process, a
difference to which Professor Starbuck has called attention.  You
know how it is when you try to recollect a forgotten name. 
Usually you help the recall by working for it, by mentally
running over the places, persons, and things with which the word
was connected.  But sometimes this effort fails:  you feel then
as if the harder you tried the less hope there would be, as
though the name were JAMMED, and pressure in its direction only
kept it all the more from rising. And then the opposite expedient
often succeeds.  Give up the effort entirely; think of something
altogether different, and in half an hour the lost name comes
sauntering into your mind, as Emerson says, as carelessly as if
it had never been invited.  Some hidden process was started in
you by the effort, which went on after the effort ceased, and
made the result come as if it came spontaneously.  A certain
music teacher, says Dr. Starbuck, says to her pupils after the
thing to be done has been clearly pointed out, and unsuccessfully
attempted:  “Stop trying and it will do itself!"[108]
[108] Psychology of Religion, p. 117.
There is thus a conscious and voluntary way and an involuntary
and unconscious way in which mental results may get accomplished;
and we find both ways exemplified in the history of conversion,
giving us two types, which Starbuck calls the volitional type and
the type by self-surrender respectively.
In the volitional type the regenerative change is usually
gradual, and consists in the building up, piece by piece, of a
new set of moral and spiritual habits.  But there are always
critical points here at which the movement forward seems much
more rapid.  This psychological fact is abundantly illustrated by
Dr. Starbuck.  Our education in any practical accomplishment
proceeds apparently by jerks and starts just as the growth of our
physical bodies does.
“An athlete . . . sometimes awakens suddenly to an understanding
of the fine points of the game and to a real enjoyment of it,
just as the convert awakens to an appreciation of religion. If he
keeps on engaging in the sport, there may come a day when all at
once the game plays itself through him–when he loses himself in
some great contest.  In the same way, a musician may suddenly
reach a point at which pleasure in the technique of the art
entirely falls away, and in some moment of inspiration he becomes
the instrument through which music flows. The writer has chanced
to hear two different married persons, both of whose wedded lives
had been beautiful from the beginning, relate that not until a
year or more after marriage did they awake to the full
blessedness of married life.  So it is with the religious
experience of these persons we are studying."[109]
[109] Psychology of Religion, p. 385.  Compare, also, pp. 137-144
and 262.
We shall erelong hear still more remarkable illustrations of
subconsciously maturing processes eventuating in results of which
we suddenly grow conscious.  Sir William Hamilton and Professor
Laycock of Edinburgh were among the first to call attention to
this class of effects; but Dr. Carpenter first, unless I am
mistaken, introduced the term “unconscious cerebration,” which
has since then been a popular phrase of explanation.  The facts
are now known to us far more extensively than he could know them,
and the adjective “unconscious,” being for many of them almost
certainly a misnomer, is better replaced by the vaguer term
"subconscious” or “subliminal.”
Of the volitional type of conversion it would be easy to give
examples,[110] but they are as a rule less interesting than 
those of the self-surrender type, in which the subconscious
effects are more abundant and often startling.  I will therefore
hurry to the latter, the more so because the difference between
the two types is after all not radical.  Even in the most
voluntarily built-up sort of regeneration there are passages of
partial self-surrender interposed; and in the great majority of
all cases, when the will had done its uttermost towards bringing
one close to the complete unification aspired after, it seems
that the very last step must be left to other forces and
performed without the help of its activity.  In other words,
self-surrender becomes then indispensable.  “The personal will,"
says Dr. Starbuck, “must be given up.  In many cases relief
persistently refuses to come until the person ceases to resist,
or to make an effort in the direction he desires to go.”
[110] For instance, C. G. Finney italicizes the volitional
element:  “Just at this point the whole question of Gospel
salvation opened to my mind in a manner most marvelous to me at
the time.  I think I then saw, as clearly as I ever have in my
life, the reality and fullness of the atonement of Christ. 
Gospel salvation seemed to me to be an offer of something to be
accepted, and all that was necessary on my part to get my own
consent to give up my sins and accept Christ.  After this
distinct revelation had stood for some little time before my
mind, the question seemed to be put, ’will you accept it now,
to-day?’ I replied, ’Yes; I will accept it to-day, or I will die
in the attempt!’”  He then went into the woods, where he
describes his struggles.  He could not pray, his heart was
hardened in its pride.  “I then reproached myself for having
promised to give my heart to God before I left the woods.  When I
came to try, I found I could not. . . .  My inward soul hung
back, and there was no going out of my heart to God.  The thought
was pressing me, of the rashness of my promise that I would give
my heart to God that day, or die in the attempt.  It seemed to me
as if that was binding on my soul; and yet I was going to break
my vow.  A great sinking and discouragement came over me, and I
felt almost too weak to stand upon my knees.  Just at this moment
I again thought I heard some one approach me, and I opened my
eyes to see whether it were so.  But right there the revelation
of my pride of heart, as the great difficulty that stood in the
way, was distinctly shown to me.  An overwhelming sense of my
wickedness in being ashamed to have a human being see me on my
knees before God took such powerful possession of me, that I
cried at the top of my voice, and exclaimed that I would not
leave that place if all the men on earth and all the devils in
hell surrounded me.  ’What!’ I said, ’such a degraded sinner as I
am, on my knees confessing my sins to the great and holy God; and
ashamed to have any human being, and a sinner like myself, find
me on my knees endeavoring to make my peace with my offended
God!’  The sin appeared awful, infinite.  It broke me down before
the Lord.”  Memoirs, pp. 14-16, abridged.
“I had said I would not give up; but when my will was broken, it
was all over,” writes one of Starbuck’s correspondents.– Another
says:  “I simply said:  ’Lord, I have done all I can; I leave the
whole matter with Thee,’ and immediately there came to me a great
peace."–Another:  “All at once it occurred to me that I might be
saved, too, if I would stop trying to do it all myself, and
follow Jesus:  somehow I lost my load."–Another:  “I finally
ceased to resist, and gave myself up, though it was a hard
struggle.  Gradually the feeling came over me that I had done my
part, and God was willing to do his."[111]–"Lord Thy will be
done; damn or save!” cries John Nelson,[112] exhausted with the
anxious struggle to escape damnation; and at that moment his soul
was filled with peace.
[111] Starbuck:  Op. cit., pp. 91, 114.
[112] Extracts from the Journal of Mr. John Nelson, London, no
date, p. 24.
Dr. Starbuck gives an interesting, and it seems to me a true,
account–so far as conceptions so schematic can claim truth at
all–of the reasons why self-surrender at the last moment should
be so indispensable.  To begin with, there are two things in the
mind of the candidate for conversion:  first, the present
incompleteness or wrongness, the “sin” which he is eager to
escape from; and, second, the positive ideal which he longs to
compass.  Now with most of us the sense of our present wrongness
is a far more distinct piece of our consciousness than is the
imagination of any positive ideal we can aim at.  In a majority
of cases, indeed, the “sin” almost exclusively engrosses the
attention, so that conversion is “a process of struggling away
from sin rather than of striving towards righteousness."[113] A
man’s conscious wit and will, so far as they strain towards the
ideal, are aiming at something only dimly and inaccurately
imagined. Yet all the while the forces of mere organic ripening
within him are going on towards their own prefigured result, and
his conscious strainings are letting loose subconscious allies
behind the scenes, which in their way work towards rearrangement;
and the rearrangement towards which all these deeper forces tend
is pretty surely definite, and definitely different from what he
consciously conceives and determines.  It may consequently be
actually interfered with (JAMMED, as it were, like the lost word
when we seek too energetically to recall it), by his voluntary
efforts slanting from the true direction.
[113] Starbuck, p. 64.
Starbuck seems to put his finger on the root of the matter when
he says that to exercise the personal will is still to live in
the region where the imperfect self is the thing most emphasized.
Where, on the contrary, the subconscious forces take the lead, it
is more probably the better self in posse which directs the
operation.  Instead of being clumsily and vaguely aimed at from
without, it is then itself the organizing centre.  What then must
the person do?  “He must relax,” says Dr. Starbuck–"that is, he
must fall back on the larger Power that makes for righteousness,
which has been welling up in his own being, and let it finish in
its own way the work it has begun. . . .  The act of yielding, in
this point of view, is giving one’s self over to the new life,
making it the centre of a new personality, and living, from
within, the truth of it which had before been viewed
objectively."[114]
[114] Starbuck, p. 115.
“Man’s extremity is God’s opportunity” is the theological way of
putting this fact of the need of self-surrender; whilst the
physiological way of stating it would be, “Let one do all in
one’s power, and one’s nervous system will do the rest.”  Both
statements acknowledge the same fact.[115]
[115] Starbuck, p. 113.
To state it in terms of our own symbolism:  When the new centre
of personal energy has been subconsciously incubated so long as
to be just ready to open into flower, “hands off” is the only
word for us, it must burst forth unaided!
We have used the vague and abstract language of psychology. But
since, in any terms, the crisis described is the throwing of our
conscious selves upon the mercy of powers which, whatever they
may be, are more ideal than we are actually, and make for our
redemption, you see why self-surrender has been and always must
be regarded as the vital turning-point of the religious life, so
far as the religious life is spiritual and no affair of outer
works and ritual and sacraments.  One may say that the whole
development of Christianity in inwardness has consisted in little
more than the greater and greater emphasis attached to this
crisis of self-surrender.  From Catholicism to Lutheranism, and
then to Calvinism; from that to Wesleyanism; and from this,
outside of technical Christianity altogether, to pure
"liberalism” or transcendental idealism, whether or not of the
mind-cure type, taking in the mediaeval mystics, the quietists,
the pietists, and quakers by the way, we can trace the stages of
progress towards the idea of an immediate spiritual help,
experienced by the individual in his forlornness and standing in
no essential need of doctrinal apparatus or propitiatory
machinery.
Psychology and religion are thus in perfect harmony up to this
point, since both admit that there are forces seemingly outside
of the conscious individual that bring redemption to his life. 
Nevertheless psychology, defining these forces as “subconscious,"
and speaking of their effects, as due to “incubation,” or
"cerebration,” implies that they do not transcend the
individual’s personality; and herein she diverges from Christian
theology, which insists that they are direct supernatural
operations of the Deity.  I propose to you that we do not yet
consider this divergence final, but leave the question for a
while in abeyance–continued inquiry may enable us to get rid of
some of the apparent discord.
Revert, then, for a moment more to the psychology of
self-surrender.
When you find a man living on the ragged edge of his
consciousness, pent in to his sin and want and incompleteness,
and consequently inconsolable, and then simply tell him that all
is well with him, that he must stop his worry, break with his
discontent, and give up his anxiety, you seem to him to come with
pure absurdities.  The only positive consciousness he has tells
him that all is NOT well, and the better way you offer sounds
simply as if you proposed to him to assert cold-blooded
falsehoods.  “The will to believe” cannot be stretched as far as
that.  We can make ourselves more faithful to a belief of which
we have the rudiments, but we cannot create a belief out of whole
cloth when our perception actively assures us of its opposite. 
The better mind proposed to us comes in that case in the form of
a pure negation of the only mind we have, and we cannot actively
will a pure negation.
There are only two ways in which it is possible to get rid of
anger, worry, fear, despair, or other undesirable affections. 
One is that an opposite affection should overpoweringly break
over us, and the other is by getting so exhausted with the
struggle that we have to stop–so we drop down, give up, and
DON’T CARE any longer.  Our emotional brain-centres strike work,
and we lapse into a temporary apathy. Now there is documentary
proof that this state of temporary exhaustion not infrequently
forms part of the conversion crisis.  So long as the egoistic
worry of the sick soul guards the door, the expansive confidence
of the soul of faith gains no presence.  But let the former faint
away, even but for a moment, and the latter can profit by the
opportunity, and, having once acquired possession, may retain it.
Carlyle’s Teufelsdrockh passes from the everlasting No to the
everlasting Yes through a “Centre of Indifference.”
Let me give you a good illustration of this feature in the
conversion process.  That genuine saint, David Brainerd,
describes his own crisis in the following words:–
“One morning, while I was walking in a solitary place as usual, I
at once saw that all my contrivances and projects to effect or
procure deliverance and salvation for myself were utterly in
vain; I was brought quite to a stand, as finding myself totally
lost.  I saw that it was forever impossible for me to do anything
towards helping or delivering myself, that I had made all the
pleas I ever could have made to all eternity; and that all my
pleas were vain, for I saw that self-interest had led me to pray,
and that I had never once prayed from any respect to the glory of
God.  I saw that there was no necessary connection between my
prayers and the bestowment of divine mercy, that they laid not
the least obligation upon God to bestow his grace upon me; and
that there was no more virtue or goodness in them than there
would be in my paddling with my hand in the water.  I saw that I
had been heaping up my devotions before God, fasting, praying,
etc., pretending, and indeed really thinking sometimes that I was
aiming at the glory of God; whereas I never once truly intended
it, but only my own happiness.  I saw that as I had never done
anything for God, I had no claim on anything from him but
perdition, on account of my hypocrisy and mockery.  When I saw
evidently that I had regard to nothing but self-interest, then my
duties appeared a vile mockery and a continual course of lies,
for the whole was nothing but self-worship, and an horrid abuse
of God.
“I continued, as I remember, in this state of mind, from Friday
morning till the Sabbath evening following (July 12, 1739), when
I was walking again in the same solitary place.  Here, in a
mournful melancholy state I was attempting to pray; but found no
heart to engage in that or any other duty; my former concern,
exercise, and religious affections were now gone. I thought that
the Spirit of God had quite left me; but still was NOT
DISTRESSED; yet disconsolate, as if there was nothing in heaven
or earth could make me happy.  Having been thus endeavoring to
pray–though, as I thought, very stupid and senseless–for near
half an hour; then, as I was walking in a thick grove,
unspeakable glory seemed to open to the apprehension of my soul. 
I do not mean any external brightness, nor any imagination of a
body of light, but it was a new inward apprehension or view that
I had of God, such as I never had before, nor anything which had
the least resemblance to it.  I had no particular apprehension of
any one person in the Trinity, either the Father, the Son, or the
Holy Ghost; but it appeared to be Divine glory.  My soul rejoiced
with joy unspeakable, to see such a God, such a glorious Divine
Being; and I was inwardly pleased and satisfied that he should be
God over all for ever and ever.  My soul was so captivated and
delighted with the excellency of God that I was even swallowed up
in him, at least to that degree that I had no thought about my
own salvation, and scarce reflected that there was such a
creature as myself.  I continued in this state of inward joy,
peace, and astonishing, till near dark without any sensible
abatement; and then began to think and examine what I had seen;
and felt sweetly composed in my mind all the evening following. 
I felt myself in a new world, and everything about me appeared
with a different aspect from what it was wont to do.  At this
time, the way of salvation opened to me with such infinite
wisdom, suitableness, and excellency, that I wondered I should
ever think of any other way of salvation; was amazed that I had
not dropped my own contrivances, and complied with this lovely,
blessed, and excellent way before.  If I could have been saved by
my own duties or any other way that I had formerly contrived, my
whole soul would now have refused it.  I wondered that all the
world did not see and comply with this way of salvation, entirely
by the righteousness of Christ."[116]
[116] Edward’s and Dwight’s Life of Brainerd, New Haven, 1822,
pp. 45-47, abridged.
I have italicized the passage which records the exhaustion of the
anxious emotion hitherto habitual.  In a large proportion, 
perhaps the majority, of reports, the writers speak as if the
exhaustion of the lower and the entrance of the higher emotion
were simultaneous,[117] yet often again they speak as if the
higher actively drove the lower out.  This is undoubtedly true in
a great many instances, as we shall presently see.  But often
there seems little doubt that both conditions–subconscious
ripening of the one affection and exhaustion of the other–must
simultaneously have conspired, in order to produce the result.
[117] Describing the whole phenomenon as a change of equilibrium,
we might say that the movement of new psychic energies towards
the personal centre and the recession of old ones towards the
margin (or the rising of some objects above, and the sinking of
others below the conscious threshold) were only two ways of
describing an indivisible event.  Doubtless this is often
absolutely true, and Starbuck is right when he says that
"self-surrender” and “new determination,” though seeming at first
sight to be such different experiences, are “really the same
thing.  Self-surrender sees the change in terms of the old self,
determination sees it in terms of the new.”  Op. cit., p. 160.
T. W. B., a convert of Nettleton’s, being brought to an acute
paroxysm of conviction of sin, ate nothing all day, locked
himself in his room in the evening in complete despair, crying
aloud, “How long, O Lord, how long?”  “After repeating this and
similar language,” he says, “several times, I seemed to sink away
into a state of insensibility.  When I came to myself again I was
on my knees, praying not for myself but for others.  I felt
submission to the will of God, willing that he should do with me
as should seem good in his sight.  My concern seemed all lost in
concern for others."[118]
[118] A. A. Bonar:  Nettleton and his Labors, Edinburgh, 1854, p.
261.
Our great American revivalist Finney writes:  “I said to myself: 
’What is this?  I must have grieved the Holy Ghost entirely away.
I have lost all my conviction.  I have not a particle of concern
about my soul; and it must be that the Spirit has left me.’
’Why!’ thought I, ’I never was so far from being concerned about
my own salvation in my life.’ . . . I tried to recall my
convictions, to get back again the load of sin under which I had
been laboring.  I tried in vain to make myself anxious.  I was so
quiet and peaceful that I tried to feel concerned about that,
lest it should be the result of my having grieved the Spirit
away."[119]
[119] Charles G. Finney:  Memoirs written by Himself, 1876, pp.
17, 18.
But beyond all question there are persons in whom, quite
independently of any exhaustion in the Subject’s capacity for
feeling, or even in the absence of any acute previous feeling,
the higher condition, having reached the due degree of energy,
bursts through all barriers and sweeps in like a sudden flood. 
These are the most striking and memorable cases, the cases of
instantaneous conversion to which the conception of divine grace
has been most peculiarly attached. I have given one of them at
length–the case of Mr. Bradley.  But I had better reserve the
other cases and my comments on the rest of the subject for the
following lecture.
In this lecture we have to finish the subject of Conversion,
considering at first those striking instantaneous instances of
which Saint Paul’s is the most eminent, and in which, often amid
tremendous emotional excitement or perturbation of the senses, a
complete division is established in the twinkling of an eye
between the old life and the new.  Conversion of this type is an
important phase of religious experience, owing to the part which
it has played in Protestant theology, and it behooves us to study
it conscientiously on that account.
I think I had better cite two or three of these cases before
proceeding to a more generalized account.  One must know concrete
instances first; for, as Professor Agassiz used to say, one can
see no farther into a generalization than just so far as one’s
previous acquaintance with particulars enables one to take it in.
I will go back, then, to the case of our friend Henry Alline, and
quote his report of the 26th of March, 1775, on which his poor
divided mind became unified for good.
“As I was about sunset wandering in the fields lamenting my
miserable lost and undone condition, and almost ready to sink
under my burden, I thought I was in such a miserable case as
never any man was before.  I returned to the house, and when I
got to the door, just as I was stepping off the threshold, the
following impressions came into my mind like a powerful but small
still voice.  You have been seeking, praying, reforming,
laboring, reading, hearing, and meditating, and what have you
done by it towards your salvation?  Are you any nearer to
conversion now than when you first began?  Are you any more
prepared for heaven, or fitter to appear before the impartial bar
of God, than when you first began to seek?
“It brought such conviction on me that I was obliged to say that
I did not think I was one step nearer than at first, but as much
condemned, as much exposed, and as miserable as before. I cried
out within myself, O Lord God, I am lost, and if thou, O Lord,
dost not find out some new way, I know nothing of, I shall never
be saved, for the ways and methods I have prescribed to myself
have all failed me, and I am willing they should fail. O Lord,
have mercy! O Lord, have mercy!
“These discoveries continued until I went into the house and sat
down.  After I sat down, being all in confusion, like a drowning
man that was just giving up to sink, and almost in an agony, I
turned very suddenly round in my chair, and seeing part of an old
Bible lying in one of the chairs, I caught hold of it in great
haste; and opening it without any premeditation, cast my eyes on
the 38th Psalm, which was the first time I ever saw the word of
God:  it took hold of me with such power that it seemed to go
through my whole soul, so that it seemed as if God was praying
in, with, and for me.  About this time my father called the
family to attend prayers; I attended, but paid no regard to what
he said in his prayer, but continued praying in those words of
the Psalm.  Oh, help me, help me! cried I, thou Redeemer of
souls, and save me, or I am gone forever; thou canst this night,
if thou pleasest, with one drop of thy blood atone for my sins,
and appease the wrath of an angry God.  At that instant of time
when I gave all up to him to do with me as he pleased, and was
willing that God should rule over me at his pleasure, redeeming
love broke into my soul with repeated scriptures, with such power
that my whole soul seemed to be melted down with love, the burden
of guilt and condemnation was gone, darkness was expelled, my
heart humbled and filled with gratitude, and my whole soul, that
was a few minutes ago groaning under mountains of death, and
crying to an unknown God for help, was now filled with immortal
love, soaring on the wings of faith,<215> freed from the chains
of death and darkness, and crying out, My Lord and my God; thou
art my rock and my fortress, my shield and my high tower, my
life, my joy, my present and my everlasting portion.  Looking up,
I thought I saw that same light [he had on more than one previous
occasion seen subjectively a bright blaze of light], though it
appeared different; and as soon as I saw it, the design was
opened to me, according to his promise, and I was obliged to cry
out:  Enough, enough, O blessed God! The work of conversion, the
change, and the manifestations of it are no more disputable than
that light which I see, or anything that ever I saw.
“In the midst of all my joys, in less than half an hour after my
soul was set at liberty, the Lord discovered to me my labor in
the ministry and call to preach the gospel.  I cried out, Amen,
Lord, I’ll go; send me, send me.  I spent the greatest part of
the night in ecstasies of joy, praising and adoring the Ancient
of Days for his free and unbounded grace.  After I had been so
long in this transport and heavenly frame that my nature seemed
to require sleep, I thought to close my eyes for a few moments;
then the devil stepped in, and told me that if I went to sleep, I
should lose it all, and when I should awake in the morning I
would find it to be nothing but a fancy and delusion. I
immediately cried out, O Lord God, if I am deceived, undeceive
me.
“I then closed my eyes for a few minutes, and seemed to be
refreshed with sleep; and when I awoke, the first inquiry was,
Where is my God?  And in an instant of time, my soul seemed awake
in and with God, and surrounded by the arms of everlasting love. 
About sunrise I arose with joy to relate to my parents what God
had done for my soul, and declared to them the miracle of God’s
unbounded grace.  I took a Bible to show them the words that were
impressed by God on my soul the evening before; but when I came
to open the Bible, it appeared all new to me.
“I so longed to be useful in the cause of Christ, in preaching
the gospel, that it seemed as if I could not rest any longer, but
go I must and tell the wonders of redeeming love.  I lost all 
taste for carnal pleasures, and carnal company, and was enabled
to forsake them."[120]
[120] Life and Journals, Boston, 1806, pp. 31-40, abridged.
Young Mr. Alline, after the briefest of delays, and with no
book-learning but his Bible, and no teaching save that of his own
experience, became a Christian minister, and thenceforward his
life was fit to rank, for its austerity and single-mindedness,
with that of the most devoted saints.  But happy as he became in
his strenuous way, he never got his taste for even the most
innocent carnal pleasures back.  We must class him, like Bunyan
and Tolstoy, amongst those upon whose soul the iron of melancholy
left a permanent imprint.  His redemption was into another
universe than this mere natural world, and life remained for him
a sad and patient trial.  Years later we can find him making such
an entry as this in his diary:  “On Wednesday the 12th I preached
at a wedding, and had the happiness thereby to be the means of
excluding carnal mirth.”
The next case I will give is that of a correspondent of Professor
Leuba, printed in the latter’s article, already cited, in vol. 
vi.  of the American Journal of Psychology.  This subject was an
Oxford graduate, the son of a clergyman, and the story resembles
in many points the classic case of Colonel Gardiner, which
everybody may be supposed to know. Here it is, somewhat
abridged:–
“Between the period of leaving Oxford and my conversion I never
darkened the door of my father’s church, although I lived with
him for eight years, making what money I wanted by journalism,
and spending it in high carousal with any one who would sit with
me and drink it away.  So I lived, sometimes drunk for a week
together, and then a terrible repentance, and would not touch a
drop for a whole month.
“In all this period, that is, up to thirty-three years of age, I
never had a desire to reform on religious grounds.  But all my 
pangs were due to some terrible remorse I used to feel after a
heavy carousal, the remorse taking the shape of regret after my
folly in wasting my life in such a way–a man of superior talents
and education.  This terrible remorse turned me gray in one
night, and whenever it came upon me I was perceptibly grayer the
next morning.  What I suffered in this way is beyond the
expression of words.  It was hell-fire in all its most dreadful
tortures.  Often did I vow that if I got over ’this time’ I would
reform.  Alas, in about three days I fully recovered, and was as
happy as ever.  So it went on for years, but, with a physique
like a rhinoceros, I always recovered, and as long as I let drink
alone, no man was as capable of enjoying life as I was.
“I was converted in my own bedroom in my father’s rectory house
at precisely three o’clock in the afternoon of a hot July day
(July 13, 1886).  I was in perfect health, having been off from
the drink for nearly a month.  I was in no way troubled about my
soul.  In fact, God was not in my thoughts that day.  A young
lady friend sent me a copy of Professor Drummond’s Natural Law in
the Spiritual World, asking me my opinion of it as a literary
work only.  Being proud of my critical talents and wishing to
enhance myself in my new friend’s esteem, I took the book to my
bedroom for quiet, intending to give it a thorough study, and
then write her what I thought of it.  It was here that God met me
face to face, and I shall never forget the meeting.  ’He that
hath the Son hath life eternal, he that hath not the Son hath not
life.’  I had read this scores of times before, but this made all
the difference.  I was now in God’s presence and my attention was
absolutely ’soldered’ on to this verse, and I was not allowed to
proceed with the book till I had fairly considered what these
words really involved.  Only then was I allowed to proceed,
feeling all the while that there was another being in my bedroom,
though not seen by me.  The stillness was very marvelous, and I
felt supremely happy.  It was most unquestionably shown me, in
one second of time, that I had never touched the Eternal:  and
that if I died then, I must inevitably be lost. I was undone.  I
knew it as well as I now know I am saved.  The Spirit of God
showed it me in ineffable love; there was no terror in it; I felt
God’s love so powerfully upon me that only a mighty sorrow crept
over me that I had lost all through my own folly; and what was I
to do?  What could I do?  I did not repent even; God never asked
me to repent.  All I felt was ’I am undone,’ and God cannot help
it, although he loves me.  No fault on the part of the Almighty. 
All the time I was supremely happy:  I felt like a little child
before his father.  I had done wrong, but my Father did not scold
me, but loved me most wondrously.  Still my doom was sealed.  I
was lost to a certainty, and being naturally of a brave
disposition I did not quail under it, but deep sorrow
for the past, mixed with regret for what I had lost, took hold
upon me, and my soul thrilled within me to think it was all over.
Then there crept in upon me so gently, so lovingly, so
unmistakably, a way of escape, and what was it after all?  The
old, old story over again, told in the simplest way:  ’There is
no name under heaven whereby ye can be saved except that of the
Lord Jesus Christ.’ No words were spoken to me; my soul seemed to
see my Saviour in the spirit, and from that hour to this, nearly
nine years now, there has never been in my life one doubt that
the Lord Jesus Christ and God the Father both worked upon me that
afternoon in July, both differently, and both in the most perfect
love conceivable, and I rejoiced there and then in a conversion
so astounding that the whole village heard of it in less than
twenty-four hours.
“But a time of trouble was yet to come.  The day after my
conversion I went into the hay-field to lend a hand with the
harvest, and not having made any promise to God to abstain or
drink in moderation only, I took too much and came home drunk. 
My poor sister was heart-broken; and I felt ashamed of myself and
got to my bedroom at once, where she followed me weeping
copiously.  She said I had been converted and fallen away
instantly.  But although I was quite full of drink (not muddled,
however), I knew that God’s work begun in me was not going to be
wasted.  About midday I made on my knees the first prayer before
God for twenty years.  I did not ask to be forgiven; I felt that
was no good, for I would be sure to fall again.  Well, what did I
do?  I committed myself to him in the profoundest belief that my
individuality was going to be destroyed, that he would take all
from me, and I was willing.  In such a <219> surrender lies the
secret of a holy life.  From that hour drink has had no terrors
for me:  I never touch it, never want it.  The same thing
occurred with my pipe:  after being a regular smoker from my
twelfth year the desire for it went at once, and has never
returned.  So with every known sin, the deliverance in each case
being permanent and complete.  I have had no temptation since
conversion, God seemingly having shut out Satan from that course
with me.  He gets a free hand in other ways, but never on sins of
the flesh.  Since I gave up to God all ownership in my own life,
he has guided me in a thousand ways, and has opened my path in a
way almost incredible to those who do not enjoy the blessing of a
truly surrendered life.”
So much for our graduate of Oxford, in whom you notice the
complete abolition of an ancient appetite as one of the
conversion’s fruits.
The most curious record of sudden conversion with which I am
acquainted is that of M. Alphonse Ratisbonne, a free-thinking
French Jew, to Catholicism, at Rome in 1842.  In a letter to a
clerical friend, written a few months later, the convert gives a
palpitating account of the circumstances.[121] The predisposing
conditions appear to have been slight.  He had an elder brother
who had been converted and was a Catholic priest.  He was himself
irreligious, and nourished an antipathy to the apostate brother
and generally to his “cloth.”  Finding himself at Rome in his
twenty-ninth year, he fell in with a French gentleman who tried
to make a proselyte of him, but who succeeded no farther after
two or three conversations than to get him to hang (half
jocosely) a religious medal round his neck, and to accept and
read a copy of a short prayer to the Virgin.  M. Ratisbonne
represents his own part in the conversations as having been of a
light and chaffing order; but he notes the fact that for some
days he was unable to banish the words of the prayer from his
mind, and that the night before the crisis he had a sort of
nightmare, in the imagery of which a black cross with no Christ
upon it figured.  Nevertheless, until noon of the next day he was
free in mind and spent the time in trivial conversations.  I now
give his own words.
[121] My quotations are made from an Italian translation of this
letter in the Biografia del sig. M. A. Ratisbonne, Ferrara, 1843,
which I have to thank Monsignore D. O’Connell of Rome for
bringing to my notice.  I abridge the original.
“If at this time any one had accosted me, saying:  ’Alphonse, in
a quarter of an hour you shall be adoring Jesus Christ as your
God and Saviour; you shall lie prostrate with your face upon the
ground in a humble church; you shall be smiting your breast at
the foot of a priest; you shall pass the carnival in a college of
Jesuits to prepare yourself to receive baptism, ready to give
your life for the Catholic faith; you shall renounce the world
and its pomps and pleasures; renounce your fortune, your hopes,
and if need be, your betrothed; the affections of your family,
the esteem of your friends, and your attachment to the Jewish
people; you shall have no other aspiration than to follow Christ
and bear his cross till death;’–if, I say, a prophet had come to
me with such a prediction, I should have judged that only one
person could be more mad than he–whosoever, namely, might
believe in the possibility of such senseless folly becoming true.
And yet that folly is at present my only wisdom, my sole
happiness.
“Coming out of the cafe I met the carriage of Monsieur B. [the
proselyting friend].  He stopped and invited me in for a drive,
but first asked me to wait for a few minutes whilst he attended
to some duty at the church of San Andrea delle Fratte.  Instead
of waiting in the carriage, I entered the church myself to look
at it.  The church of San Andrea was poor, small, and empty; I
believe that I found myself there almost alone.  No work of art
attracted my attention; and I passed my eyes mechanically over
its interior without being arrested by any particular thought.  I
can only remember an entirely black dog which went trotting and
turning before me as I mused.  In an instant the dog had
disappeared, the whole church had vanished, I no longer saw
anything, . . . or more truly I saw, O my God, one thing alone. 
"Heavens, how can I speak of it?  Oh no! human words cannot
attain to expressing the inexpressible.  Any description, however
sublime it might be, could be but a profanation of the
unspeakable truth.
“I was there prostrate on the ground, bathed in my tears, with my
heart beside itself, when M. B. called me back to life.  I could
not reply to the questions which followed from him one upon the
other.  But finally I took the medal which I had on my breast,
and with all the effusion of my soul I kissed the image of the
Virgin, radiant with grace, which it bore.  Oh, indeed, it was
She! It was indeed She! [What he had seen had been a vision of
the Virgin.]
“I did not know where I was:  I did not know whether I was
Alphonse or another.  I only felt myself changed and believed
myself another me; I looked for myself in myself and did not find
myself.  In the bottom of my soul I felt an explosion of the most
ardent joy; I could not speak; I had no wish to reveal what had
happened.  But I felt something solemn and sacred within me which
made me ask for a priest.  I was led to one; and there alone,
after he had given me the positive order, I spoke as best I
could, kneeling, and with my heart still trembling.  I could give
no account to myself of the truth of which I had acquired a
knowledge and a faith.  All that I can say is that in an instant
the bandage had fallen from my eyes, and not one bandage only,
but the whole manifold of bandages in which I had been brought
up.  One after another they rapidly disappeared, even as the mud
and ice disappear under the rays of the burning sun.
“I came out as from a sepulchre, from an abyss of darkness; and I
was living, perfectly living.  But I wept, for at the bottom of
that gulf I saw the extreme of misery from which I had been saved
by an infinite mercy; and I shuddered at the sight of my
iniquities, stupefied, melted, overwhelmed with wonder and with
gratitude.  You may ask me how I came to this new insight, for
truly I had never opened a book of religion nor even read a
single page of the Bible, and the dogma of original sin is either
entirely denied or forgotten by the Hebrews of to-day, so that I
had thought so little about it that I doubt whether I ever knew
its name.  But how came I, then, to this perception of it?  I can
<222> answer nothing save this, that on entering that church I
was in darkness altogether, and on coming out of it I saw the
fullness of the light.  I can explain the change no better than
by the simile of a profound sleep or the analogy of one born
blind who should suddenly open his eyes to the day.  He sees, but
cannot define the light which bathes him and by means of which he
sees the objects which excite his wonder.  If we cannot explain
physical light, how can we explain the light which is the truth
itself?  And I think I remain within the limits of veracity when
I say that without having any knowledge of the letter of
religious doctrine, I now intuitively perceived its sense and
spirit. Better than if I saw them, I FELT those hidden things; I
felt them by the inexplicable effects they produced in me.  It
all happened in my interior mind, and those impressions, more
rapid than thought shook my soul, revolved and turned it, as it
were, in another direction, towards other aims, by other paths. 
I express myself badly.  But do you wish, Lord, that I should
inclose in poor and barren words sentiments which the heart alone
can understand?”
I might multiply cases almost indefinitely, but these will
suffice to show you how real, definite, and memorable an event a
sudden conversion may be to him who has the experience.
Throughout the height of it he undoubtedly seems to himself a
passive spectator or undergoer of an astounding process performed
upon him from above.  There is too much evidence of this for any
doubt of it to be possible.  Theology, combining this fact with
the doctrines of election and grace, has concluded that the
spirit of God is with us at these dramatic moments in a
peculiarly miraculous way, unlike what happens at any other
juncture of our lives.  At that moment, it believes, an
absolutely new nature is breathed into us, and we become
partakers of the very substance of the Deity.
That the conversion should be instantaneous seems called for on
this view, and the Moravian Protestants appear to have been the
first to see this logical consequence.  The Methodists soon
followed suit, practically if not dogmatically, and a short time
ere his death, John Wesley wrote:–
“In London alone I found 652 members of our Society who were
exceeding clear in their experience, and whose testimony I could
see no reason to doubt.  And every one of these (without a single
exception) has declared that his deliverance from sin was
instantaneous; that the change was wrought in a moment.  Had half
of these, or one third, or one in twenty, declared it was
GRADUALLY wrought in THEM, I should have believed this, with
regard to THEM, and thought that SOME were gradually sanctified
and some instantaneously.  But as I have not found, in so long a
space of time, a single person speaking thus, I cannot but
believe that sanctification is commonly, if not always, an
instantaneous work."[122]
[122] Tyerman’s Life of Wesley, i. 463.
All this while the more usual sects of Protestantism have set no
such store by instantaneous conversion.  For them as for the
Catholic Church, Christ’s blood, the sacraments, and the
individual’s ordinary religious duties are practically supposed
to suffice to his salvation, even though no acute crisis of
self-despair and surrender followed by relief should be
experienced.  For Methodism, on the contrary, unless there have
been a crisis of this sort, salvation is only offered, not
effectively received, and Christ’s sacrifice in so far forth is
incomplete.  Methodism surely here follows, if not the healthier-
minded, yet on the whole the profounder spiritual instinct. The
individual models which it has set up as typical and worthy of
imitation are not only the more interesting dramatically, but
psychologically they have been the more complete.
In the fully evolved Revivalism of Great Britain and America we
have, so to speak, the codified and stereotyped procedure to
which this way of thinking has led.  In spite of the
unquestionable fact that saints of the once-born type exist, that
there may be a gradual growth in holiness without a cataclysm; in
spite of the obvious leakage (as one may say) of much mere
natural goodness into the scheme of salvation; revivalism has
always assumed that only its own type of religious experience can
be perfect; you must first be nailed on the cross of natural
despair and agony, and then in the twinkling of an eye be
miraculously released.
It is natural that those who personally have traversed such an
experience should carry away a feeling of its being a miracle
rather than a natural process.  Voices are often heard, lights
seen, or visions witnessed; automatic motor phenomena occur; and
it always seems, after the surrender of the personal will, as if
an extraneous higher power had flooded in and taken possession. 
Moreover the sense of renovation, safety, cleanness, rightness,
can be so marvelous and jubilant as well to warrant one’s belief
in a radically new substantial nature.
“Conversion,” writes the New England Puritan, Joseph Alleine, “is
not the putting in a patch of holiness; but with the true convert
holiness is woven into all his powers, principles, and practice. 
The sincere Christian is quite a new fabric, from the foundation
to the top-stone.  He is a new man, a new creature.”
And Jonathan Edwards says in the same strain:  “Those gracious
influences which are the effects of the Spirit of God are
altogether supernatural–are quite different from anything that
unregenerate men experience.  They are what no improvement, or
composition of natural qualifications or principles will ever
produce; because they not only differ from what is natural, and
from everything that natural men experience in degree and
circumstances, but also in kind, and are of a nature far more
excellent. From hence it follows that in gracious affections
there are [also] new perceptions and sensations entirely
different in their nature and kind from anything experienced by
the [same] saints before they were sanctified. . . .  The
conceptions which the saints have of the loveliness of God, and
that kind of delight which they experience in it, are quite
peculiar, and entirely different from anything which a natural
man can possess, or of which he can form any proper notion.”
And that such a glorious transformation as this ought of
necessity to be preceded by despair is shown by Edwards in
another passage.
“Surely it cannot be unreasonable,” he says, “that before God
delivers us from a state of sin and liability to everlasting woe,
he should give us some considerable sense of the evil from which
he delivers us, in order that we may know and feel the importance
of salvation, and be enabled to appreciate the value of what God
is pleased to do for us.  As those who are saved are successively
in two extremely different states–first in a state of
condemnation and then in a state of justification and
blessedness–and as God, in the salvation of men, deals with them
as rational and intelligent creatures, it appears agreeable to
this wisdom, that those who are saved should be made sensible of
their Being, in those two different states.  In the first place,
that they should be made sensible of their state of condemnation;
and afterwards, of their state of deliverance and happiness.”
Such quotations express sufficiently well for our purpose the
doctrinal interpretation of these changes.  Whatever part
suggestion and imitation may have played in producing them in men
and women in excited assemblies, they have at any rate been in
countless individual instances an original and unborrowed
experience.  Were we writing the story of the mind from the
purely natural-history point of view, with no religious interest
whatever, we should still have to write down man’s liability to
sudden and complete conversion as one of his most curious
peculiarities.
What, now, must we ourselves think of this question?  Is an
instantaneous conversion a miracle in which God is present as he
is present in no change of heart less strikingly abrupt? Are
there two classes of human beings, even among the apparently
regenerate, of which the one class really partakes of Christ’s
nature while the other merely seems to do so?  Or, on the
contrary, may the whole phenomenon of regeneration, even in these
startling instantaneous examples, possibly be a strictly natural
process, divine in its fruits, of course, but in one case more
and in another less so, and neither more nor less divine in its
mere causation and mechanism than any other process, high or low,
of man’s interior life?
Before proceeding to answer this question, I must ask you to
listen to some more psychological remarks.  At our last lecture,
I explained the shifting of men’s centres of personal energy
within them and the lighting up of new crises of emotion.  I
explained the phenomena as partly due to explicitly conscious
processes of thought and will, but as due largely also to the
subconscious incubation and maturing of motives deposited by the
experiences of life.  When ripe, the results hatch out, or burst
into flower.  I have now to speak of the subconscious region, in
which such processes of flowering may occur, in a somewhat less
vague way.  I only regret that my limits of time here force me to
be so short.
The expression “field of consciousness” has but recently come
into vogue in the psychology books.  Until quite lately the unit
of mental life which figured most was the single “idea,” supposed
to be a definitely outlined thing.  But at present psychologists
are tending, first, to admit that the actual unit is more
probably the total mental state, the entire wave of consciousness
or field of objects present to the thought at any time; and,
second, to see that it is impossible to outline this wave, this
field, with any definiteness.
As our mental fields succeed one another, each has its centre of
interest, around which the objects of which we are less and less
attentively conscious fade to a margin so faint that its limits
are unassignable.  Some fields are narrow fields and some are
wide fields.  Usually when we have a wide field we rejoice, for
we then see masses of truth together, and often get glimpses of
relations which we divine rather than see, for they shoot beyond
the field into still remoter regions of objectivity, regions
which we seem rather to be about to perceive than to perceive
actually.  At other times, of drowsiness, illness, or fatigue,
our fields may narrow almost to a point, and we find ourselves
correspondingly oppressed and contracted.
Different individuals present constitutional differences in this
matter of width of field.  Your great organizing geniuses are men
with habitually vast fields of mental vision, in which a whole
programme of future operations will appear dotted out at once,
the rays shooting far ahead into definite directions of advance. 
In common people there is never this magnificent inclusive view
of a topic.  They stumble along, feeling their way, as it were,
from point to point, and often stop entirely.  In certain
diseased conditions consciousness is a mere spark, without memory
of the past or thought of the future, and with the present
narrowed down to some one simple emotion or sensation of the
body.
The important fact which this “field” formula commemorates is the
indetermination of the margin.  Inattentively realized as is the
matter which the margin contains, it is nevertheless there, and
helps both to guide our behavior and to determine the next
movement of our attention.  It lies around us like a “magnetic
field,” inside of which our centre of energy turns like a
compass-needle, as the present phase of consciousness alters into
its successor.  Our whole past store of memories floats beyond
this margin, ready at a touch to come in; and the entire mass of
residual powers, impulses, and knowledges that constitute our
empirical self stretches continuously beyond it.  So vaguely
drawn are the outlines between what is actual and what is only
potential at any moment of our conscious life, that it is always
hard to say of certain mental elements whether we are conscious
of them or not.
The ordinary psychology, admitting fully the difficulty of
tracing the marginal outline, has nevertheless taken for <228>
granted, first, that all the consciousness the person now has, be
the same focal or marginal, inattentive or attentive, is there in
the “field” of the moment, all dim and impossible to assign as
the latter’s outline may be; and, second, that what is absolutely
extra-marginal is absolutely non-existent. and cannot be a fact
of consciousness at all.
And having reached this point, I must now ask you to recall what
I said in my last lecture about the subconscious life.  I said,
as you may recollect, that those who first laid stress upon these
phenomena could not know the facts as we now know them.  My first
duty now is to tell you what I meant by such a statement.
I cannot but think that the most important step forward that has
occurred in psychology since I have been a student of that
science is the discovery, first made in 1886, that, in certain
subjects at least, there is not only the consciousness of the
ordinary field, with its usual centre and margin, but an addition
thereto in the shape of a set of memories, thoughts, and feelings
which are extra-marginal and outside of the primary consciousness
altogether, but yet must be classed as conscious facts of some
sort, able to reveal their presence by unmistakable signs.  I
call this the most important step forward because, unlike the
other advances which psychology has made, this discovery has
revealed to us an entirely unsuspected peculiarity in the
constitution of human nature.  No other step forward which
psychology has made can proffer any such claim as this.
In particular this discovery of a consciousness existing beyond
the field, or subliminally as Mr. Myers terms it, casts light on
many phenomena of religious biography.  That is why I have to
advert to it now, although it is naturally impossible for me in
this place to give you any account of the evidence on which the
admission of such a consciousness is based.  You will find it set
forth in many recent books, Binet’s Alterations of
Personality[123] being perhaps as good a one as any to recommend.
[123] Published in the International Scientific Series.
The human material on which the demonstration has been made has
so far been rather limited and, in part at least, eccentric,
consisting of unusually suggestible hypnotic subjects, and of
hysteric patients.  Yet the elementary mechanisms of our life are
presumably so uniform that what is shown to be true in a marked
degree of some persons is probably true in some degree of all,
and may in a few be true in an extraordinarily high degree.
The most important consequence of having a strongly developed
ultra-marginal life of this sort is that one’s ordinary fields of
consciousness are liable to incursions from it of which the
subject does not guess the source, and which, therefore, take for
him the form of unaccountable impulses to act, or inhibitions of
action, of obsessive ideas, or even of hallucinations of sight or
hearing.  The impulses may take the direction of automatic speech
or writing, the meaning of which the subject himself may not
understand even while he utters it; and generalizing this
phenomenon, Mr. Myers has given the name of automatism, sensory
or motor, emotional or intellectual, to this whole sphere of
effects, due to “up-rushes” into the ordinary consciousness of
energies originating in the subliminal parts of the mind.
The simplest instance of an automatism is the phenomenon of
post-hypnotic suggestion, so-called.  You give to a hypnotized
subject, adequately susceptible, an order to perform some
designated act–usual or eccentric, it makes no difference–
after he wakes from his hypnotic sleep. Punctually, when the
signal comes or the time elapses upon which you have told him
that the act must ensue, he performs it;–but in so doing he has
no recollection of your suggestion, and he always trumps up an
improvised pretext for his behavior if the act be of an eccentric
kind.  It may even be suggested to a subject to have a vision or
to hear a voice at a certain interval after waking, and when the
time comes the vision is seen or the voice heard, with no inkling
on the subject’s part of its source.
In the wonderful explorations by Binet, Janet, Breuer, Freud,
Mason, Prince, and others, of the subliminal consciousness of
patients with hysteria, we have revealed to us whole systems of
underground life, in the shape of memories of a painful sort
which lead a parasitic existence, buried outside of the primary
fields of consciousness, and making irruptions thereinto with
hallucinations, pains, convulsions, paralyses of feeling and of
motion, and the whole procession of symptoms of hysteric disease
of body and of mind.  Alter or abolish by suggestion these
subconscious memories, and the patient immediately gets well. 
His symptoms were automatisms, in Mr. Myers’s sense of the word. 
These clinical records sound like fairy-tales when one first
reads them, yet it is impossible to doubt their accuracy; and,
the path having been once opened by these first observers,
similar observations have been made elsewhere.  They throw, as I
said, a wholly new light upon our natural constitution.
And it seems to me that they make a farther step inevitable.
Interpreting the unknown after the analogy of the known, it seems
to me that hereafter, wherever we meet with a phenomenon of
automatism, be it motor impulses, or obsessive idea, or
unaccountable caprice, or delusion, or hallucination, we are
bound first of all to make search whether it be not an explosion,
into the fields of ordinary consciousness, of ideas elaborated
outside of those fields in subliminal regions of the mind.  We
should look, therefore, for its source in the Subject’s
subconscious life.  In the hypnotic cases, we ourselves create
the source by our suggestion, so we know it directly.  In the
hysteric cases, the lost memories which are the source have to be
extracted from the patient’s Subliminal by a number of ingenious
methods, for an account of which you must consult the books.  In
other pathological cases, insane delusions, for example, or
psychopathic obsessions, the source is yet to seek, but by
analogy it also should be in subliminal regions which
improvements in our methods may yet conceivably put on tap. There
lies the mechanism logically to be assumed–but the assumption
involves a vast program of work to be done in the way of
verification, in which the religious experiences of man must play
their part.[124]
[124] The reader will here please notice that in my exclusive
reliance in the last lecture on the subconscious “incubation” of
motives deposited by a growing experience, I followed the method
of employing accepted principles of explanation as far as one
can.  The subliminal region, whatever else it may be, is at any
rate a place now admitted by psychologists to exist for the
accumulation of vestiges of sensible experience (whether
inattentively or attentively registered), and for their
elaboration according to ordinary psychological or logical laws
into results that end by attaining such a “tension"that they may
at times enter consciousness with something like a burst.  It
thus is “scientific” to interpret all otherwise unaccountable
invasive alterations of consciousness as results of the tension
of subliminal memories reaching the bursting-point.  But candor
obliges me to confess that there are occasional bursts into
consciousness of results of which it is not easy to demonstrate
any prolonged subconscious incubation.  Some of the cases I used
to illustrate the sense of presence of the unseen in Lecture III
were of this order (compare pages 59, 60, 61, 66); and we
shall see other experiences of the kind when we come to the
subject of mysticism.  The case of Mr. Bradley, that of M.
Ratisbonne, possibly that of Colonel Gardiner, possibly that of
saint Paul, might not be so easily explained in this simple way. 
The result, then, would have to be ascribed either to a merely
physiological nerve storm, a “discharging lesion” like that of
epilepsy; or, in case it were useful and rational, as in the two
latter cases named, to some more mystical or theological
hypothesis. I make this remark in order that the reader may
realize that the subject is really complex.  But I shall keep
myself as far as possible at present to the more “scientific"
view; and only as the plot thickens in subsequent lectures shall
I consider the question of its absolute sufficiency as an
explanation of all the facts.  That subconscious incubation
explains a great number of them, there can be no doubt.
And thus I return to our own specific subject of instantaneous
conversions.  You remember the cases of Alline, Bradley,
Brainerd, and the graduate of Oxford converted at three in the
afternoon.  Similar occurrences abound, some with and some
without luminous visions, all with a sense of astonished
happiness, and of being wrought on by a higher control.  If,
abstracting altogether from the question of their value for the
future spiritual life of the individual, we take them on their
psychological side exclusively, so many peculiarities in them
remind us of what we find outside of conversion that we are
tempted to class them along with other automatisms, and to
suspect that what makes the difference between a sudden and a
gradual convert is not necessarily the presence of divine miracle
in the case of one and of something less divine in that of the
other, but rather a simple psychological peculiarity, the fact,
namely, that in the recipient of the more instantaneous grace we
have one of those Subjects who are in possession of a large
region in which mental work can go on subliminally, and from
which invasive experiences, abruptly upsetting the equilibrium of
the primary consciousness, may come.
I do not see why Methodists need object to such a view. Pray go
back and recollect one of the conclusions to which I sought to
lead you in my very first lecture.  You may remember how I there
argued against the notion that the worth of a thing can be
decided by its origin.  Our spiritual judgment, I said, our
opinion of the significance and value of a human event or
condition, must be decided on empirical grounds exclusively.  If
the fruits for life of the state of conversion are good, we ought
to idealize and venerate it, even though it be a piece of natural
psychology; if not, we ought to make short work with it, no
matter what supernatural being may have infused it.
Well, how is it with these fruits?  If we except the class of
preeminent saints of whom the names illumine history, and 
consider only the usual run of “saints,” the shopkeeping
church-members and ordinary youthful or middle-aged recipients of
instantaneous conversion, whether at revivals or in the
spontaneous course of methodistic growth, you will probably agree
that no splendor worthy of a wholly supernatural creature
fulgurates from them, or sets them apart from the mortals who
have never experienced that favor. Were it true that a suddenly
converted man as such is, as Edwards says,[125] of an entirely
different kind from a natural man, partaking as he does directly
of Christ’s substance, there surely ought to be some exquisite
class-mark, some distinctive radiance attaching even to the
lowliest specimen of this genus, to which no one of us could
remain insensible, and which, so far as it went, would prove him
more excellent than ever the most highly gifted among mere
natural men.  But notoriously there is no such radiance. 
Converted men as a class are indistinguishable from natural men;
some natural men even excel some converted men in their fruits;
and no one ignorant of doctrinal theology could guess by mere
every-day inspection of the “accidents” of the two groups of
persons before him, that their substance differed as much as
divine differs from human substance.
[125] Edwards says elsewhere:  “I am bold to say that the work of
God in the conversion of one soul, considered together with the
source foundation, and purchase of it, and also the benefit, end,
and eternal issue of it, is a more glorious work of God than the
creation of the whole material universe.”
The believers in the non-natural character of sudden conversion
have had practically to admit that there is no unmistakable
class-mark distinctive of all true converts.  The super-normal
incidents, such as voices and visions and overpowering
impressions of the meaning of suddenly presented scripture texts,
the melting emotions and tumultuous affections connected with the
crisis of change, may all come by way of nature, or worse still,
be counterfeited by Satan.  The real witness of the spirit to the
second birth is to be found only in the disposition of the
genuine child of God, the permanently patient heart, the love of
self eradicated.  And this, it has to be admitted, is also found
in those who pass no crisis, and may even be found outside of
Christianity altogether.
Throughout Jonathan Edwards’s admirably rich and delicate
description of the supernaturally infused condition, in his
Treatise on Religious Affections, there is not one decisive
trait, not one mark, that unmistakably parts it off from what may
possibly be only an exceptionally high degree of natural
goodness.  In fact, one could hardly read a clearer argument than
this book unwittingly offers in favor of the thesis that no chasm
exists between the orders of human excellence, but that here as
elsewhere, nature shows continuous differences, and generation
and regeneration are matters of degree.
All which denial of two objective classes of human beings
separated by a chasm must not leave us blind to the extraordinary
momentousness of the fact of his conversion to the individual
himself who gets converted.  There are higher and lower limits of
possibility set to each personal life.  If a flood but goes above
one’s head, its absolute elevation becomes a matter of small
importance; and when we touch our own upper limit and live in our
own highest centre of energy, we may call ourselves saved, no
matter how much higher some one else’s centre may be.  A small
man’s salvation will always be a great salvation and the greatest
of all facts FOR HIM, and we should remember this when the fruits
of our ordinary evangelicism look discouraging.  Who knows how
much less ideal still the lives of these spiritual grubs and
earthworms, these Crumps and Stigginses, might have been, if such
poor grace as they have received had never touched them at
all?[126]
[126] Emerson writes:  “When we see a soul whose acts are regal, 
graceful and pleasant as roses, we must thank God that such
things can be and are, and not turn sourly on the angel and say: 
Crump is a better man, with his grunting resistance to all his
native devils.”  True enough.  Yet Crump may really be the better
CRUMP, for his inner discords and second birth; and your
once-born “regal” character though indeed always better than poor
Crump, may fall far short of what he individually might be had he
only some Crump-like capacity for compunction over his own
peculiar diabolisms, graceful and pleasant and invariably
gentlemanly as these may be.
<235> If we roughly arrange human beings in classes, each class
standing for a grade of spiritual excellence, I believe we shall
find natural men and converts both sudden and gradual in all the
classes.  The forms which regenerative change effects have, then,
no general spiritual significance, but only a psychological
significance.  We have seen how Starbuck’s laborious statistical
studies tend to assimilate conversion to ordinary spiritual
growth.  Another American psychologist, Prof. George A. Coe,[127]
has analyzed the cases of seventy-seven converts or ex-candidates
for conversion, known to him, and the results strikingly confirm
the view that sudden conversion is connected with the possession
of an active subliminal self.  Examining his subjects with
reference to their hypnotic sensibility and to such automatisms
as hypnagogic hallucinations, odd impulses, religious dreams
about the time of their conversion, etc., he found these
relatively much more frequent in the group of converts whose
transformation had been “striking,” “striking” transformation
being defined as a change which, though not necessarily
instantaneous, seems to the subject of it to be distinctly
different from a process of growth, however rapid."[128]
Candidates for conversion at revivals are, as you know, often
disappointed:  they experience nothing striking.  Professor Coe
had a number of persons of this class among his seventy-seven
subjects, and they almost all, when tested by hypnotism, proved
to belong to a subclass which he calls “spontaneous,” that is,
fertile in self-suggestions, as distinguished from a “passive"
subclass, to which most of the subjects of striking
transformation belonged.  His inference is that self-suggestion
of impossibility had prevented the influence upon these persons
of an environment which, on the more “passive” subjects, had
easily brought forth the effects they looked for.  Sharp
distinctions are difficult in these regions, and Professor Coe’s
numbers are small.  But his methods were careful, and the results
tally with what one might expect; and they seem, on the whole, to
justify his practical conclusion, which is that if you should
expose to a converting influence a subject in whom three factors
unite:  first, pronounced emotional sensibility; second, tendency
to automatisms; and third, suggestibility of the passive type;
you might then safely predict the result:  there would be a
sudden conversion, a transformation of the striking kind.
[127] In his book, The Spiritual Life, New York, 1900.
[128] Op. cit., p. 112.
Does this temperamental origin diminish the significance of the
sudden conversion when it has occurred?  Not in the least, as
Professor Coe well says; for “the ultimate test of religious
values is nothing psychological, nothing definable in terms of
HOW IT HAPPENS, but something ethical, definable only in terms of
WHAT IS ATTAINED."[129]
[129] Op. cit., p. 144
As we proceed farther in our inquiry we shall see that what is
attained is often an altogether new level of spiritual vitality,
a relatively heroic level, in which impossible things have become
possible, and new energies and endurances are shown.  The
personality is changed, the man is born anew, whether or not his
psychological idiosyncrasies are what give the particular shape
to his metamorphosis.  “Sanctification” is the technical name of
this result; and erelong examples of it shall be brought before
you.  In this lecture I have still only to add a few remarks on
the assurance and peace which fill the hour of change itself.
One word more, though, before proceeding to that point, lest the
final purpose of my explanation of suddenness by subliminal
activity be misunderstood.  I do indeed believe that if the
Subject have no liability to such subconscious activity, or if
his conscious fields have a hard rind of a margin that resists
incursions from beyond it, his conversion must he gradual if it
occur, and must resemble any simple growth into new habits.  His
possession of a developed subliminal self, and of a leaky or
pervious margin, is thus a conditio sine qua non of the Subject’s
becoming converted in the instantaneous way.  But if you, being
orthodox Christians, ask me as a psychologist whether the
reference of a phenomenon to a subliminal self does not exclude
the notion of the direct presence of the Deity altogether, I have
to say frankly that as a psychologist I do not see why it
necessarily should.  The lower manifestations of the Subliminal,
indeed, fall within the resources of the personal subject:  his
ordinary sense-material, inattentively taken in and
subconsciously remembered and combined, will account for all his
usual automatisms.  But just as our primary wide-awake
consciousness throws open our senses to the touch of things
material so it is logically conceivable that IF THERE BE higher
spiritual agencies that can directly touch us, the psychological
condition of their doing so MIGHT BE our possession of a
subconscious region which alone should yield access to them.  The
hubbub of the waking life might close a door which in the dreamy
Subliminal might remain ajar or open.
Thus that perception of external control which is so essential a
feature in conversion might, in some cases at any rate, be
interpreted as the orthodox interpret it:  forces transcending
the finite individual might impress him, on condition of his
being what we may call a subliminal human specimen.  But in any
case the VALUE of these forces would have to be determined by
their effects, and the mere fact of their transcendency would of
itself establish no presumption that they were more divine than
diabolical.
I confess that this is the way in which I should rather see the
topic left lying in your minds until I come to a much later
lecture, when I hope once more to gather these dropped threads
together into more definitive conclusions.  The notion of a
subconscious self certainly ought not at this point of our
inquiry to be held to EXCLUDE all notion of a higher penetration.
If there be higher powers able to impress us, they may get access
to us only through the subliminal door. (See below, p. 506 ff.)
Let us turn now to the feelings which immediately fill the hour
of the conversion experience.  The first one to be noted is just
this sense of higher control.  It is not always, but it is very
often present.  We saw examples of it in Alline, Bradley,
Brainerd, and elsewhere.  The need of such a higher controlling
agency is well expressed in the short reference which the eminent
French Protestant Adolphe Monod makes to the crisis of his own
conversion.  It was at Naples in his early manhood, in the summer
of 1827.
“My sadness,” he says, “was without limit, and having got entire
possession of me, it filled my life from the most indifferent
external acts to the most secret thoughts, and corrupted at their
source my feelings, my judgment, and my happiness.  It was then
that I saw that to expect to put a stop to this disorder by my
reason and my will, which were themselves diseased, would be to
act like a blind man who should pretend to correct one of his
eyes by the aid of the other equally blind one.  I had then no
resource save in some INFLUENCE FROM WITHOUT.  I remembered the
promise of the Holy Ghost; and what the positive declarations of
the Gospel had never succeeded in bringing home to me, I learned
at last from necessity, and believed, for the first time in my
life, in this promise, in the only sense in which it answered the
needs of my soul, in that, namely, of a real external
supernatural action, capable of giving me thoughts, and taking
them away from me, and exerted on me by a God as truly master of
my heart as he is of the rest of nature. Renouncing then all
merit, all strength, abandoning all my personal resources, and
acknowledging no other title to his mercy than my own utter
misery, I went home and threw myself on my knees and prayed as I
never yet prayed in my life.  From this day onwards a new
interior life began for me:  not that my melancholy had
disappeared, but it had lost its sting.  Hope had entered into my
heart, and once entered on the path, the God of Jesus Christ, to
whom I then had learned to give myself up, little by little did
the rest."[130]
[130] I piece together a quotation made by W. Monod, in his book
la Vie, and a letter printed in the work:  Adolphe Monod:  I,.
Souvenirs de sa Vie, 1885, p. 433.
It is needless to remind you once more of the admirable congruity
of Protestant theology with the structure of the mind as shown in
such experiences.  In the extreme of melancholy the self that
consciously is can do absolutely nothing. It is completely
bankrupt and without resource, and no works it can accomplish
will avail.  Redemption from such subjective conditions must be a
free gift or nothing, and grace through Christ’s accomplished
sacrifice is such a gift.
“God,” says Luther, “is the God of the humble, the miserable, the
oppressed, and the desperate, and of those that are brought even
to nothing; and his nature is to give sight to the blind, to
comfort the broken-hearted, to justify sinners, to save the very
desperate and damned.  Now that pernicious and pestilent opinion
of man’s own righteousness, which will not be a sinner, unclean,
miserable, and damnable, but righteous and holy, suffereth not
God to come to his own natural and proper work.  Therefore God
must take this maul in hand (the law, I mean) to beat in pieces
and bring to nothing this beast with her vain confidence, that
she may so learn at length by her own misery that she is utterly
forlorn and damned.  But here lieth the difficulty, that when a
man is terrified and cast down, he is so little able to raise
himself up again and say, ’Now I am bruised and afflicted enough;
now is the time of grace; now is the time to hear Christ.’  The
foolishness of man’s heart is so great that then he rather
seeketh to himself more laws to satisfy his conscience.  ’If I
live,’ saith he, ’I will amend my life:  I will do this, I will
do that.’  But here, except thou do the quite contrary, except
thou send Moses away with his law, and in these terrors and this
anguish lay hold upon Christ who died for thy sins, look for no
salvation.  Thy cowl, thy shaven crown, thy chastity, thy
obedience, thy poverty, thy works, thy merits?  what shall all
these do?  what shall the law of Moses avail?  If I, wretched and
damnable sinner, through works or merits could have loved the Son
of God, and so come to him, what needed he to deliver himself for
me?  If I, being a wretch and damned sinner, could be redeemed by
any other price, what needed the Son of God to be given?  But
because there was no other price, therefore he delivered neither
sheep, ox, gold, nor silver, but even God himself, entirely and
wholly ’for me,’ even ’for me,’ I say, a miserable, wretched
sinner.  Now, therefore, I take comfort and apply this to MYSELF.
And this manner of applying is the very true force and power of
faith.  For he died NOT to justify the righteous, but the
UN-righteous, and to make THEM the children of God."[131]
[131] Commentary on Galatians, ch. iii. verse 19, and ch. ii.
verse 20, abridged.
That is, the more literally lost you are, the more literally you
are the very being whom Christ’s sacrifice has already saved. 
Nothing in Catholic theology, I imagine, has ever spoken to sick
souls as straight as this message from Luther’s personal
experience.  As Protestants are not all sick souls, of course
reliance on what Luther exults in calling the dung of one’s
merits, the filthy puddle of one’s own righteousness, has come to
the front again in their religion; but the adequacy of his view
of Christianity to the deeper parts of our human mental structure
is shown by its wildfire contagiousness when it was a new and
quickening thing.
Faith that Christ has genuinely done his work was part of 
what Luther meant by faith, which so far is faith in a fact
intellectually conceived of.  But this is only one part of
Luther’s faith, the other part being far more vital.  This other
part is something not intellectual but immediate and intuitive,
the assurance, namely, that I, this individual I, just as I
stand, without one plea, etc., am saved now and forever. [132]
Professor Leuba is undoubtedly right in contending that the
conceptual belief about Christ’s work, although so often
efficacious and antecedent, is really accessory and
non-essential, and that the “joyous conviction” can also come by
far other channels than this conception.  It is to the joyous
conviction itself, the assurance that all is well with one, that
he would give the name of faith par excellence.  “When the sense
of estrangement,” he writes, “fencing man about in a narrowly
limited ego, breaks down, the individual finds himself ’at one
with all creation.’ He lives in the universal life; he and man,
he and nature, he and God, are one.  That state of confidence,
trust, union with all things, following upon the achievement of
moral unity, is the Faith-state.  Various dogmatic beliefs
suddenly, on the advent of the faith-state, acquire a character
of certainty, assume a new reality, become an object of faith. 
As the ground of assurance here is not rational, argumentation is
irrelevant.  But such conviction being a mere casual offshoot of
the faith-state, it is a gross error to imagine that the chief
practical value of the faith-state is its power to stamp with the
seal of reality certain particular theological conceptions.[133]
On the contrary, its value lies solely in the fact that it is the
psychic correlate of a biological growth reducing contending
desires to one direction; a growth which expresses itself in new
affective states and new reactions; in larger, nobler, more
Christ-like activities.  The ground of the specific assurance in
religious dogmas is then an affective experience.  The objects of
faith may even be preposterous; the affective stream will float
them along, and invest them with unshakable certitude.  The more
startling the affective experience, the less explicable it seems,
the easier it is to make it the carrier of unsubstantiated
notions."[134]
[132] In some conversions, both steps are distinct; in this one,
for example:–
“Whilst I was reading the evangelical treatise, I was soon struck
by an expression:  ’the finished work of Christ.’ ’Why,’ I asked
of myself, ’does the author use these terms?  Why does he not say
"the atoning work”?’ Then these words, ’It is finished,’
presented themselves to my mind.  ’What is it that is finished?’
I asked, and in an instant my mind replied:  ’A perfect expiation
for sin; entire satisfaction has been given; the debt has been
paid by the Substitute. Christ has died for our sins; not for
ours only, but for those of all men.  If, then, the entire work
is finished, all the debt paid, what remains for me to do?’ In
another instant the light was shed through my mind by the Holy
Ghost, and the joyous conviction was given me that nothing more
was to be done, save to fall on my knees, to accept this Saviour
and his love, to praise God forever.”  Autobiography of Hudson
Taylor.  I translate back into English from the French
translation of Challand (Geneva, no date), the original not being
accessible.
[133] Tolstoy’s case was a good comment on those words.  There
was almost no theology in his conversion.  His faith-state was
the sense come back that life was infinite in its moral
significance.
[134] American Journal of Psychology, vii. 345-347, abridged.
The characteristics of the affective experience which, to avoid
ambiguity, should, I think, be called the state of assurance
rather than the faith-state, can be easily enumerated, though it
is probably difficult to realize their intensity, unless one has
been through the experience one’s self.
The central one is the loss of all the worry, the sense that all
is ultimately well with one, the peace, the harmony, the
WILLINGNESS TO BE, even though the outer conditions should remain
the same.  The certainty of God’s “grace,” of “justification,"
"salvation,” is an objective belief that usually accompanies the
change in Christians; but this may be entirely lacking and yet
the affective peace remain the same–you will recollect the case
of the Oxford graduate:  and many might be given where the
assurance of personal salvation <243> was only a later result. 
A passion of willingness, of acquiescence, of admiration, is the
glowing centre of this state of mind.
The second feature is the sense of perceiving truths not known
before.  The mysteries of life become lucid, as Professor Leuba
says; and often, nay usually, the solution is more or less
unutterable in words.  But these more intellectual phenomena may
be postponed until we treat of mysticism.
A third peculiarity of the assurance state is the objective
change which the world often appears to undergo.  “An appearance
of newness beautifies every object,” the precise opposite of that
other sort of newness, that dreadful unreality and strangeness in
the appearance of the world, which is experienced by melancholy
patients, and of which you may recall my relating some
examples.[135] This sense of clean and beautiful newness within
and without is one of the commonest entries in conversion
records. Jonathan Edwards thus describes it in himself:–
[135] Above, p. 150.
“After this my sense of divine things gradually increased, and
became more and more lively, and had more of that inward
sweetness.  The appearance of everything was altered; there
seemed to be, as it were, a calm, sweet cast, or appearance of
divine glory, in almost everything.  God’s excellency, his
wisdom, his purity and love, seemed to appear in everything; in
the sun, moon, and stars; in the clouds and blue sky; in the
grass, flowers, and trees; in the water and all nature; which
used greatly to fix my mind.  And scarce anything, among all the
works of nature, was so sweet to me as thunder and lightning;
formerly nothing had been so terrible to me.  Before, I used to
be uncommonly terrified with thunder, and to be struck with
terror when I saw a thunderstorm rising; but now, on the
contrary, it rejoices me."[136]
[136] Dwight:  Life of Edwards, New York, 1830, p. 61, abridged.
<244> Billy Bray, an excellent little illiterate English
evangelist, records his sense of newness thus:–
“I said to the Lord:  ’Thou hast said, they that ask shall
receive, they that seek shall find, and to them that knock the
door shall be opened, and I have faith to believe it.’ In an
instant the Lord made me so happy that I cannot express what I
felt.  I shouted for joy.  I praised God with my whole heart. . .
. I think this was in November, 1823, but what day of the month
I do not know.  I remember this, that everything looked new to
me, the people, the fields, the cattle, the trees.  I was like a
new man in a new world.  I spent the greater part of my time in
praising the Lord."[137]
[137] W. F. Bourne:  The King’s Son, a Memoir of Billy Bray,
London, Hamilton, Adams & Co., 1887, p. 9.
Starbuck and Leuba both illustrate this sense of newness by
quotations.  I take the two following from Starbuck’s manuscript
collection.  One, a woman, says:–
“I was taken to a camp-meeting, mother and religious friends
seeking and praying for my conversion.  My emotional nature was
stirred to its depths; confessions of depravity and pleading with
God for salvation from sin made me oblivious of all surroundings.
I plead for mercy, and had a vivid realization of forgiveness and
renewal of my nature.  When rising from my knees I exclaimed,
’Old things have passed away, all things have become new.’ It was
like entering another world, a new state of existence.  Natural
objects were glorified, my spiritual vision was so clarified that
I saw beauty in every material object in the universe, the woods
were vocal with heavenly music; my soul exulted in the love of
God, and I wanted everybody to share in my joy.”
The next case is that of a man:–
“I know not how I got back into the encampment, but found myself
staggering up to Rev. ––’s Holiness tent–and as it was full of
seekers and a terrible noise inside, some groaning, some
laughing, and some shouting, and by a large oak, ten feet from
the tent, I fell on my face by a bench, and tried to pray, and
every time I would call on God, something like a man’s hand would
strangle me by choking.  I don’t know whether there were any one
around or near me or not.  I thought I should surely die if I did
not get help, but just as often as I would pray, that unseen hand
was felt on my throat and my breath squeezed off. Finally
something said:  ’Venture on the atonement, for you will die
anyway if you don’t.’  So I made one final struggle to call on
God for mercy, with the same choking and strangling, determined
to finish the sentence of prayer for Mercy, if I did strangle and
die, and the last I remember that time was falling back on the
ground with the same unseen hand on my throat.  I don’t know how
long I lay there or what was going on.  None of my folks were
present.  When I came to myself, there were a crowd around me
praising God.  The very heavens seemed to open and pour down rays
of light and glory.  Not for a moment only, but all day and
night, floods of light and glory seemed to pour through my soul,
and oh, how I was changed, and everything became new.  My horses
and hogs and even everybody seemed changed.”
This man’s case introduces the feature of automatisms, which in
suggestible subjects have been so startling a feature at revivals
since, in Edwards’s, Wesley’s and Whitfield’s time, these became
a regular means of gospel-propagation.  They were at first
supposed to be semi-miraculous proofs of “power” on the part of
the Holy Ghost; but great divergence of opinion quickly arose
concerning them.  Edwards, in his Thoughts on the Revival of
Religion in New England, has to defend them against their
critics; and their value has long been matter of debate even
within the revivalistic denominations.[138] They undoubtedly have
no essential spiritual significance, and although their presence
makes his conversion more memorable to the convert, it has never
been proved that converts who show them are more persevering or
fertile in good fruits than those whose change of heart has had
less violent accompaniments.  On the whole, unconsciousness,
convulsions, visions, involuntary vocal utterances, and
suffocation, must be simply ascribed to the subject’s having a
large subliminal region, involving nervous instability. This is
often the subject’s own view of the matter afterwards.  One of
Starbuck’s correspondents writes, for instance:–
[138] Consult William B. Sprague:  Lectures on Revivals of
Religion, New York, 1832, in the long Appendix to which the
opinions of a large number of ministers are given.
“I have been through the experience which is known as conversion.
My explanation of it is this:  the subject works his emotions up
to the breaking point, at the same time resisting their physical
manifestations, such as quickened pulse, etc., and then suddenly
lets them have their full sway over his body.  The relief is
something wonderful, and the pleasurable effects of the emotions
are experienced to the highest degree.”
There is one form of sensory automatism which possibly deserves
special notice on account of its frequency.  I refer to
hallucinatory or pseudo-hallucinatory luminous phenomena,
photisms, to use the term of the psychologists.  Saint Paul’s
blinding heavenly vision seems to have been a phenomenon of this
sort; so does Constantine’s cross in the sky.  The last case but
one which I quoted mentions floods of light and glory.  Henry
Alline mentions a light, about whose externality he seems
uncertain.  Colonel Gardiner sees a blazing light.  President
Finney writes:–
“All at once the glory of God shone upon and round about me in a
manner almost marvelous. . . . A light perfectly ineffable shone
in my soul, that almost prostrated me on the ground. . . . This
light seemed like the brightness of the sun in every direction. 
It was too intense for the eyes. . . . I think I knew something
then, by actual experience, of that light that prostrated Paul on
the way to Damascus.  It was surely a light such as I could not
have endured long."[139]
[139] Memoirs, p. 34
Such reports of photisms are indeed far from uncommon. Here is
another from Starbuck’s collection, where the light appeared
evidently external:–
“I had attended a series of revival services for about two weeks
off and on.  Had been invited to the altar several times, all the
time becoming more deeply impressed, when finally I decided I
must do this, or I should be lost.  Realization of conversion was
very vivid, like a ton’s weight being lifted from my heart; a
strange light which seemed to light up the whole room (for it was
dark); a conscious supreme bliss which caused me to repeat ’Glory
to God’ for a long time.  Decided to be God’s child for life, and
to give up my pet ambition, wealth and social position.  My
former habits of life hindered my growth somewhat, but I set
about overcoming these systematically, and in one year my whole
nature was changed, i. e., my ambitions were of a different
order.”
Here is another one of Starbuck’s cases, involving a luminous
element:–
“I had been clearly converted twenty-three years before, or
rather reclaimed.  My experience in regeneration was then clear
and spiritual, and I had not backslidden.  But I experienced
entire sanctification on the 15th day of March, 1893, about
eleven o’clock in the morning.  The particular accompaniments of
the experience were entirely unexpected.  I was quietly sitting
at home singing selections out of Pentecostal Hymns.  Suddenly
there seemed to be a something sweeping into me and inflating my
entire being–such a sensation as I had never experienced before.
When this experience came, I seemed to be conducted around a
large, capacious, well-lighted room.  As I walked with my
invisible conductor and looked around, a clear thought was coined
in my mind, ’They are not here, they are gone.’  As soon as the
thought was definitely formed in my mind, though no word was
spoken, the Holy Spirit impressed me that I was surveying my
own soul.  Then, for the first time in all my life, did I know
that I was cleansed from all sin, and filled with the fullness of
God.”
Leuba quotes the case of a Mr. Peek, where the luminous affection
reminds one of the chromatic hallucinations produced by the
intoxicant cactus buds called mescal by the Mexicans:–
“When I went in the morning into the fields to work, the glory of
God appeared in all his visible creation.  I well remember we
reaped oats, and how every straw and head of the oats seemed, as
it were, arrayed in a kind of rainbow glory, or to glow, if I may
so express it, in the glory of God."[140]
[140] These reports of sensorial photism shade off into what are
evidently only metaphorical accounts of the sense of new
spiritual illumination, as, for instance, in Brainerd’s
statement:  “As I was walking in a thick grove, unspeakable glory
seemed to open to the apprehension of my soul.  I do not mean any
external brightness, for I saw no such thing, nor any imagination
of a body of light in the third heavens, or anything of that
nature, but it was a new inward apprehension or view that I had
of God.”
In a case like this next one from Starbuck’s manuscript
collection the lighting up of the darkness is probably also
metaphorical:–
“One Sunday night, I resolved that when I got home to the ranch
where I was working, I would offer myself with my faculties and
all to God to be used only by and for him. . . .  It was raining
and the roads were muddy; but this desire grew so strong that I
kneeled down by the side of the road and told God all about it,
intending then to get up and go on.  Such a thing as any special
answer to my prayer never entered my mind, having been converted
by faith, but still being most undoubtedly saved.  Well, while I
was praying, I remember holding out my hands to God and telling
him they should work for him, my feet walk for him, my tongue
speak for him, etc., etc., if he would only use me as his
instrument and give me a satisfying experience–when suddenly the
darkness of the night seemed lit up–I felt, realized, knew, that
God heard and answered my prayer. Deep happiness came over me; I
felt I was accepted into the inner circle of God’s loved ones.”
In the following case also the flash of light is metaphorical:–
“A prayer meeting had been called for at close of evening
service. The minister supposed me impressed by his discourse (a
mistake–he was dull).  He came and, placing his hand upon my
shoulder, said:  ’Do you not want to give your heart to God?’  I
replied in the affirmative.  Then said he, ’Come to the front
seat.’  They sang and prayed and talked with me.  I experienced
nothing but unaccountable wretchedness. They declared that the
reason why I did not ’obtain peace’ was because I was not willing
to give up all to God.  After about two hours the minister said
we would go home.  As usual, on retiring, I prayed.  In great
distress, I at this time simply said, ’Lord, I have done all I
can, I leave the whole matter with thee.’  Immediately, like a
flash of light, there came to me a great peace, and I arose and
went into my parents’ bedroom and said, ’I do feel so wonderfully
happy.’  This I regard as the hour of conversion.  It was the
hour in which I became assured of divine acceptance and favor. 
So far as my life was concerned, it made little immediate
change.”
The most characteristic of all the elements of the conversion
crisis, and the last one of which I shall speak, is the ecstasy
of happiness produced.  We have already heard several accounts of
it, but I will add a couple more.  President Finney’s is so vivid
that I give it at length:–
“All my feelings seemed to rise and flow out; and the utterance
of my heart was, ’I want to pour my whole soul out to God.’ The
rising of my soul was so great that I rushed into the back room
of the front office, to pray.  There was no fire and no light in
the room; nevertheless it appeared to me as if it were perfectly
light.  As I went in and shut the door after me, it seemed as if
I met the Lord Jesus Christ face to face.  It did not occur to me
then, nor did it for some time afterwards, that it was wholly a
mental state.  On the contrary, it seemed to me that I saw him as
I would see any other man.  He said nothing but looked at me in
such a manner as to break me right down at his feet.  I have
always since regarded this as a most remarkable state of mind;
for it seemed to me a reality that he stood before me, and I fell
down at his feet and poured out my soul to him.  I wept aloud
like a child, and made such confessions as I could with my choked
utterance.  It seemed to me that I bathed his feet with my tears;
and yet I had no distinct impression that I touched him, that I
recollect.  I must have continued in this state for a good while,
but my mind was too absorbed with the interview to recollect
anything that I said.  But I know, as soon as my mind became calm
enough to break off from the interview, I returned to the front
office, and found that the fire that I had made of large wood was
nearly burned out.  But as I turned and was about to take a seat
by the fire, I received a mighty baptism of the Holy Ghost. 
Without any expectation of it, without ever having the thought in
my mind that there was any such thing for me, without any
recollection that I had ever heard the thing mentioned by any
person in the world, the Holy Spirit descended upon me in a
manner that seemed to go through me, body and soul.  I could feel
the impression, like a wave of electricity, going through and
through me.  Indeed, it seemed to come in waves and waves of
liquid love; for I could not express it in any other way.  It
seemed like the very breath of God.  I can recollect distinctly
that it seemed to fan me, like immense wings.
“No words can express the wonderful love that was shed abroad in
my heart.  I wept aloud with joy and love; and I do not know but
I should say I literally bellowed out the unutterable gushings of
my heart.  These waves came over me, and over me, and over me,
one after the other, until I recollect I cried out, ’I shall die
if these waves continue to pass over me.’  I said, ’Lord, I
cannot bear any more;’ yet I had no fear of death.
“How long I continued in this state, with this baptism continuing
to roll over me and go through me, I do not know.  But I know it
was late in the evening when a member of my choir –for I was the
leader of the choir–came into the office to see me.  He was a
member of the church.  He found me in this state of loud weeping,
and said to me, ’Mr. Finney, what ails you?’  I could make him no
answer for some time.  He then said, ’Are you in pain?’ I
gathered myself up as best I could, and replied, ’No, but so
happy that I cannot live.’”
I just now quoted Billy Bray; I cannot do better than give his
own brief account of his post-conversion feelings:–
“I can’t help praising the Lord.  As I go along the street, I
lift up one foot, and it seems to say ’Glory’; and I lift up the
other, and it seems to say ’Amen’; and so they keep up like that
all the time I am walking."[141]
[141] I add in a note a few more records:–
“One morning, being in deep distress, fearing every moment I
should drop into hell, I was constrained to cry in earnest for
mercy, and the Lord came to my relief, and delivered my soul from
the burden and guilt of sin.  My whole frame was in a tremor from
head to foot, and my soul enjoyed sweet peace.  The pleasure I
then felt was indescribable.  The happiness lasted about three
days, during which time I never spoke to any person about my
feelings.”  Autobiography of Dan Young, edited by W. P.
Strickland, New York, 1860.
“In an instant there rose up in me such a sense of God’s taking
care of those who put their trust in him that for an hour all the
world was crystalline, the heavens were lucid, and I sprang to my
feet and began to cry and laugh.”  H. W. Beecher, quoted by
Leuba.
“My tears of sorrow changed to joy, and I lay there praising God
in such ecstasy of joy as only the soul who experiences it can
realize.” –"I cannot express how I felt.  It was as if I had
been in a dark dungeon and lifted into the light of the sun.  I
shouted and I sang praise unto him who loved me and washed me
from my sins.  I was forced to retire into a secret place, for
the tears did flow, and I did not wish my shopmates to see me,
and yet I could not keep it a secret."–"I experienced joy almost
to weeping."–"I felt my face must have shone like that of Moses.
I had a general feeling of buoyancy.  It was the greatest joy it
was ever my lot to experience."–"I wept and laughed alternately.
I was as light as if walking on air.  I felt as if I had gained
greater peace and happiness than I had ever expected to
experience.” Starbuck’s correspondents.
One word, before I close this lecture, on the question of the
transiency or permanence of these abrupt conversions. Some of
you, I feel sure, knowing that numerous backslidings and relapses
take place, make of these their apperceiving mass for
interpreting the whole subject, and dismiss it with a pitying
smile at so much “hysterics.”  Psychologically, as well as
religiously, however, this is shallow.  It misses the point of
serious interest, which is not so much the duration as the nature
and quality of these shiftings of character to higher levels. 
Men lapse from every level–we need no statistics to tell us
that.  Love is, for instance, well known not to be irrevocable,
yet, constant or inconstant, it reveals new flights and reaches
of ideality while it lasts.  These revelations form its
significance to men and women, whatever be its duration.  So
with the conversion experience:  that it should for even a short
time show a human being what the high- water mark of his
spiritual capacity is, this is what constitutes its
importance–an importance which backsliding cannot diminish,
although persistence might increase it.  As a matter of fact, all
the more striking instances of conversion, all those, for
instance, which I have quoted, HAVE been permanent.  The case of
which there might be most doubt, on account of its suggesting so
strongly an epileptoid seizure, was the case of M. Ratisbonne. 
Yet I am informed that Ratisbonne’s whole future was shaped by
those few minutes. He gave up his project of marriage, became a
priest, founded at Jerusalem, where he went to dwell, a mission
of nuns for the conversion of the Jews, showed no tendency to use
for egotistic purposes the notoriety given him by the peculiar
circumstances of his conversion–which, for the rest, he could
seldom refer to without tears–and in short remained an exemplary
son of the Church until he died, late in the 80’s, if I remember
rightly.
The only statistics I know of, on the subject of the duration of
conversions, are those collected for Professor Starbuck by Miss
Johnston.  They embrace only a hundred persons, evangelical
church-members, more than half being Methodists.  According to
the statement of the subjects themselves, there had been
backsliding of some sort in nearly all the cases, 93 per cent. of
the women, 77 per cent. of the men.  Discussing the returns more
minutely, Starbuck finds that only 6 per cent. are relapses from
the religious faith which the conversion confirmed, and that the
backsliding complained of is in most only a fluctuation in the
ardor of sentiment.  Only six of the hundred cases report a
change of faith.  Starbuck’s conclusion is that the effect of
conversion is to bring with it “a changed attitude towards life,
which is fairly constant and permanent, although the feelings
fluctuate. . . . In other words, the persons who have passed
through conversion, having once taken a stand for the religious
life, tend to feel themselves identified with it, no matter how
much their religious enthusiasm declines."[142]
[142] Psychology of Religion, pp. 360, 357.

This electronic book of The Varieties of Religious Experience (A Study in Human Nature) by William James is in the public domain.
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on December 2003. Also see Part II of this book.

The Varieties of Religious ExperienceBy William JamesAt Amazon
