Presented by
Authorama
Public Domain Books


The last lecture left us in a state of expectancy.  What may the
practical fruits for life have been, of such movingly happy
conversions as those we heard of?  With this question the really
important part of our task opens, for you remember that we began
all this empirical inquiry not merely to open a curious chapter
in the natural history of human consciousness, but rather to
attain a spiritual judgment as to the total value and positive
meaning of all the religious trouble and happiness which we have
seen.  We must, therefore, first describe the fruits of the
religious life, and then we must judge them.  This divides our
inquiry into two distinct parts.  Let us without further preamble
proceed to the descriptive task.
It ought to be the pleasantest portion of our business in these
lectures.  Some small pieces of it, it is true, may be painful,
or may show human nature in a pathetic light, but it will be
mainly pleasant, because the best fruits of religious experience
are the best things that history has to show.  They have always
been esteemed so; here if anywhere is the genuinely strenuous
life; and to call to mind a succession of such examples as I have
lately had to wander through, though it has been only in the
reading of them, is to feel encouraged and uplifted and washed in
better moral air.
The highest flights of charity, devotion, trust, patience,
bravery to which the wings of human nature have spread themselves
have been flown for religious ideals.  I can do no better than
quote, as to this, some remarks which Sainte-Beuve in his History
of Port-Royal makes on the results of conversion or the state of
grace.
“Even from the purely human point of view,” Sainte-Beuve says,
"the phenomenon of grace must still appear sufficiently
extraordinary, eminent, and rare, both in its nature and in its
effects, to deserve a closer study.  For the soul arrives thereby
at a certain fixed and invincible state, a state which is
genuinely heroic, and from out of which the greatest deeds which
it ever performs are executed.  Through all the different forms
of communion, and all the diversity of the means which help to
produce this state, whether it be reached by a jubilee, by a
general confession, by a solitary prayer and effusion, whatever
in short to be the place and the occasion, it is easy to
recognize that it is fundamentally one state in spirit and
fruits.  Penetrate a little beneath the diversity of
circumstances, and it becomes evident that in Christians of
different epochs it is always one and the same modification by
which they are affected:  there is veritably a single fundamental
and identical spirit of piety and charity, common to those who
have received grace; an inner state which before all things is
one of love and humility, of infinite confidence in God, and of
severity for one’s self, accompanied with tenderness for others. 
The fruits peculiar to this condition of the soul have the same
savor in all, under distant suns and in different surroundings,
in Saint Teresa of Avila just as in any Moravian brother of
Herrnhut."[143]
[143] Sainte-Beuve:  Port-Royal, vol. i. pp. 95 and 106,
abridged.
Sainte-Beuve has here only the more eminent instances of
regeneration in mind, and these are of course the instructive
ones for us also to consider.  These devotees have often laid
their course so differently from other men that, judging them by
worldly law, we might be tempted to call them monstrous
aberrations from the path of nature.  I begin therefore by asking
a general psychological question as to what the inner conditions
are which may make one human character differ so extremely from
another.
I reply at once that where the character, as something
distinguished from the intellect, is concerned, the causes of
human diversity lie chiefly in our differing susceptibilities of
emotional excitement, and in the different impulses and
inhibitions which these bring in their train.  Let me make this
more clear.
Speaking generally, our moral and practical attitude, at any
given time, is always a resultant of two sets of forces within
us, impulses pushing us one way and obstructions and inhibitions
holding us back.  “Yes! yes!” say the impulses; “No! no!” say the
inhibitions.  Few people who have not expressly reflected on the
matter realize how constantly this factor of inhibition is upon
us, how it contains and moulds us by its restrictive pressure
almost as if we were fluids pent within the cavity of a jar.  The
influence is so incessant that it becomes subconscious.  All of
you, for example, sit here with a certain constraint at this
moment, and entirely without express consciousness of the fact,
because of the influence of the occasion.  If left alone in the
room, each of you would probably involuntarily rearrange himself,
and make his attitude more “free and easy.”  But proprieties and
their inhibitions snap like cobwebs if any great emotional
excitement supervenes.  I have seen a dandy appear in the street
with his face covered with shaving-lather because a house across
the way was on fire; and a woman will run among strangers in her
nightgown if it be a question of saving her baby’s life or her
own.  Take a self-indulgent woman’s life in general.  She will
yield to every inhibition set by her disagreeable sensations, lie
late in bed, live upon tea or bromides, keep indoors from the
cold.  Every difficulty finds her obedient to its “no.”  But make
a mother of her, and what have you?  Possessed by maternal
excitement, she now confronts wakefulness, weariness, and toil 
without an instant of hesitation or a word of complaint. The
inhibitive power of pain over her is extinguished wherever the
baby’s interests are at stake.  The inconveniences which this
creature occasions have become, as James Hinton says, the glowing
heart of a great joy, and indeed are now the very conditions
whereby the joy becomes most deep.
This is an example of what you have already heard of as the
"expulsive power of a higher affection.”  But be the affection
high or low, it makes no difference, so long as the excitement it
brings be strong enough.  In one of Henry Drummond’s discourses
he tells of an inundation in India where an eminence with a
bungalow upon it remained unsubmerged, and became the refuge of a
number of wild animals and reptiles in addition to the human
beings who were there.  At a certain moment a royal Bengal tiger
appeared swimming towards it, reached it, and lay panting like a
dog upon the ground in the midst of the people, still possessed
by such an agony of terror that one of the Englishmen could
calmly step up with a rifle and blow out its brains.  The tiger’s
habitual ferocity was temporarily quelled by the emotion of fear,
which became sovereign, and formed a new centre for his
character.
Sometimes no emotional state is sovereign, but many contrary ones
are mixed together.  In that case one hears both “yeses” and
"noes,” and the “will” is called on then to solve the conflict. 
Take a soldier, for example, with his dread of cowardice
impelling him to advance, his fears impelling him to run, and his
propensities to imitation pushing him towards various courses if
his comrades offer various examples.  His person becomes the seat
of a mass of interferences; and he may for a time simply waver,
because no one emotion prevails.  There is a pitch of intensity,
though, which, if any emotion reach it, enthrones that one as
alone effective and sweeps its antagonists and all their
inhibitions away.  The fury of his comrades’ charge, once entered
on, will give this pitch of courage to the soldier; the panic of
their rout will give this pitch of fear.  In these sovereign
excitements, things ordinarily impossible grow natural because
the inhibitions are annulled.  Their “no! no!” not only is not
heard, it does not exist.  Obstacles are then like tissue-paper
hoops to the circus rider–no impediment; the flood is higher
than the dam they make.
“Lass sie betteln gehn wenn sie hungrig sind!” cries the
grenadier, frantic over his Emperor’s capture, when his wife and
babes are suggested; and men pent into a burning theatre have
been known to cut their way through the crowd with knives.[144]
[144] “’Love would not be love,’ says Bourget, ’unless it could
carry one to crime.’  And so one may say that no passion would be
a veritable passion unless it could carry one to crime.”   
(Sighele:  Psychollogie des sectes, p. 136.) In other words,
great passions annul the ordinary inhibitions set by
"conscience.”  And conversely, of all the criminal human beings,
the false, cowardly, sensual, or cruel persons who actually live,
there is perhaps not one whose criminal impulse may not be at
some moment overpowered by the presence of some other emotion to
which his character is also potentially liable, provided that
other emotion be only made intense enough.  Fear is usually the
most available emotion for this result in this particular class
of persons.  It stands for conscience, and may here be classed
appropriately as a “higher affection.”  If we are soon to die, or
if we believe a day of judgment to be near at hand, how quickly
do we put our moral house in order–we do not see how sin can
evermore exert temptation over us! Old-fashioned hell-fire
Christianity well knew how to extract from fear its full
equivalent in the way of fruits for repentance, and its full
conversion value.
One mode of emotional excitability is exceedingly important in
the composition of the energetic character, from its peculiarly
destructive power over inhibitions.  I mean what in its lower
form is mere irascibility, susceptibility to wrath, the fighting
temper; and what in subtler ways manifests itself as impatience,
grimness, earnestness, severity of character. Earnestness means
willingness to live with energy, though energy bring pain.  The
pain may be pain to other people or pain to one’s self–it makes
little difference; for when the strenuous mood is on one, the aim
is to break something, no matter whose or what.  Nothing
annihilates an inhibition as irresistibly as anger does it; for,
as Moltke says of war, destruction pure and simple is its
essence.  This is what makes it so invaluable an ally of every
other passion.  The sweetest delights are trampled on with a
ferocious pleasure the moment they offer themselves as checks to
a cause by which our higher indignations are elicited.  It costs
then nothing to drop friendships, to renounce long-rooted
privileges and possessions, to break with social ties.  Rather do
we take a stern joy in the astringency and desolation; and what
is called weakness of character seems in most cases to consist in
the inaptitude for these sacrificial moods, of which one’s own
inferior self and its pet softnesses must often be the targets
and the victims.[145]
[145] Example:  Benjamin Constant was often marveled at as an
extraordinary instance of superior intelligence with inferior
character.  He writes (Journal, Paris, 1895, p. 56), “I am tossed
and dragged about by my miserable weakness.  Never was anything
so ridiculous as my indecision.  Now marriage, now solitude; now
Germany, now France hesitation upon hesitation, and all because
at bottom I am UNABLE TO GIVE UP ANYTHING.”  He can’t “get mad"
at any of his alternatives; and the career of a man beset by such
an all-round amiability is hopeless.
So far I have spoken of temporary alterations produced by
shifting excitements in the same person.  But the relatively
fixed differences of character of different persons are explained
in a precisely similar way.  In a man with a liability to a
special sort of emotion, whole ranges of inhibition habitually
vanish, which in other men remain effective, and other sorts of
inhibition take their place.  When a person has an inborn genius
for certain emotions, his life differs strangely from that of
ordinary people, for none of their usual deterrents check him. 
Your mere aspirant to a type of character, on the contrary, only
shows, when your natural lover, fighter, or reformer, with whom
the passion is a gift of nature, comes along, the hopeless
inferiority of voluntary to instinctive action.  He has
deliberately to overcome his inhibitions; the genius with the
inborn passion seems not to feel them at all; he is free of all
that inner friction and nervous waste.  To a Fox, a Garibaldi, a
General Booth, a John Brown, a Louise Michel, a Bradlaugh, the
obstacles omnipotent over those around them are as if
non-existent.  Should the rest of us so disregard them, there
might be many such heroes, for many have the wish to live for
similar ideals, and only the adequate degree of
inhibition-quenching fury is lacking.[146]
[146] The great thing which the higher excitabilities give is
COURAGE; and the addition or subtraction of a certain amount of
this quality makes a different man, a different life.  Various
excitements let the courage loose.  Trustful hope will do it;
inspiring example will do it; love will do it, wrath will do it. 
In some people it is natively so high that the mere touch of
danger does it, though danger is for most men the great inhibitor
of action.  “Love of adventure” becomes in such persons a ruling
passion.  “I believe,” says General Skobeleff, “that my bravery
is simply the passion and at the same time the contempt of
danger.  The risk of life fills me with an exaggerated rapture.
The fewer there are to share it, the more I like it.  The
participation of my body in the event is required to furnish me
an adequate excitement.  Everything intellectual appears to me to
be reflex; but a meeting of man to man, a duel, a danger into
which I can throw myself headforemost, attracts me, moves me,
intoxicates me.  I am crazy for it, I love it, I adore it.  I run
after danger as one runs after women; I wish it never to stop.
Were it always the same, it would always bring me a new pleasure.
When I throw myself into an adventure in which I hope to find it,
my heart palpitates with the uncertainty; I could wish at once to
have it appear and yet to delay.  A sort of painful and delicious
shiver shakes me; my entire nature runs to meet the peril with an
impetus that my will would in vain try to resist. (Juliette Adam: 
Le General Skobeleff, Nouvelle Revue, 1886, abridged.) Skobeleff
seems to have been a cruel egoist; but the disinterested
Garibaldi, if one may judge by his “Memorie,” lived in an
unflagging emotion of similar danger-seeking excitement.
The difference between willing and merely wishing, between having
ideals that are creative and ideals that are but pinings and
regrets, thus depends solely either on the amount of
steam-pressure chronically driving the character in the ideal
direction, or on the amount of ideal excitement transiently
acquired.  Given a certain amount of love, indignation,
generosity, magnanimity, admiration, loyalty, or enthusiasm of
self-surrender, the result is always the same.  That whole raft
of cowardly obstructions, which in tame persons and dull moods
are sovereign impediments to action, sinks away at once.  Our
conventionality,[147] our shyness, laziness, and stinginess, our
demands for precedent and permission, for guarantee and surety,
our small suspicions, timidities, despairs, where are they now? 
Severed like cobwebs, broken like bubbles in the sun–
     “Wo sind die Sorge nun und Noth
      Die mich noch gestern wollt’ erschlaffen?
      Ich scham’ mich dess’ im Morgenroth.”
The flood we are borne on rolls them so lightly under that their
very contact is unfelt.  Set free of them, we float and soar and
sing.  This auroral openness and uplift gives to all creative
ideal levels a bright and caroling quality, which is nowhere more
marked than where the controlling emotion is religious.  “The
true monk,” writes an Italian mystic, “takes nothing with him but
his lyre.”
[147] See the case on p. 69, above, where the writer describes
his experiences of communion with the Divine as consisting
"merely in the TEMPORARY OBLITERATION OF THE CONVENTIONALITIES
which usually cover my life.”
We may now turn from these psychological generalities to those
fruits of the religious state which form the special subject of
our present lecture.  The man who lives in his religious centre
of personal energy, and is actuated by spiritual enthusiasms,
differs from his previous carnal self in perfectly definite ways.
The new ardor which burns in his breast consumes in its glow the
lower “noes” which formerly beset him, and keeps him immune
against infection from the entire groveling portion of his
nature.  Magnanimities once impossible are now easy; paltry
conventionalities and mean incentives once tyrannical hold no
sway.  The stone wall inside of him has fallen, the hardness in
his heart has broken down.  The rest of us can, I think, imagine
this by recalling our state of feeling in those temporary
"melting moods” into which either the trials of real life, or the
theatre, or a novel sometimes throws us.  Especially if we weep! 
For it is then as if our tears broke through an inveterate inner
dam, and let all sorts of ancient peccancies and moral
stagnancies drain away, leaving us now washed and soft of heart
and open to every nobler leading.  With most of us the customary
hardness quickly returns, but not so with saintly persons.  Many
saints, even as energetic ones as Teresa and Loyola, have
possessed what the church traditionally reveres as a special
grace, the so-called gift of tears.  In these persons the melting
mood seems to have held almost uninterrupted control.  And as it
is with tears and melting moods, so it is with other exalted
affections.  Their reign may come by gradual growth or by a
crisis; but in either case it may have “come to stay.”
At the end of the last lecture we saw this permanence to be true
of the general paramountcy of the higher insight, even though in
the ebbs of emotional excitement meaner motives might temporarily
prevail and backsliding might occur.  But that lower temptations
may remain completely annulled, apart from transient emotion and
as if by alteration of the man’s habitual nature, is also proved
by documentary evidence in certain cases.  Before embarking on
the general natural history of the regenerate character, let me
convince you of this curious fact by one or two examples. The
most numerous are those of reformed drunkards.  You recollect the
case of Mr. Hadley in the last lecture; the Jerry McAuley Water
Street Mission abounds in similar instances.[148]  You also
remember the graduate of Oxford, converted at three in the
afternoon, and getting drunk in the hay-field the next day,
but after that permanently cured of his appetite.  “From that
hour drink has had no terrors for me:  I never touch it, never
want it.  The same thing occurred with my pipe. . . . the desire
for it went at once and has never returned.  So with every known
sin, the deliverance in each case being permanent and complete. 
I have had no temptations since conversion.”
[148] Above, p. 200.  “The only radical remedy I know for
dipsomania is religiomania,” is a saying I have heard quoted from
some medical man.
Here is an analogous case from Starbuck’s manuscript
collection:–
“I went into the old Adelphi Theatre, where there was a Holiness
meeting, . . . and I began saying, ’Lord, Lord, I must have this
blessing.’  Then what was to me an audible voice said:  ’Are you
willing to give up everything to the Lord?’ and question after
question kept coming up, to all of which I said:  ’Yes, Lord;
yes, Lord!’ until this came:  ’Why do you not accept it NOW?’ and
I said:  ’I do, Lord.’–I felt no particular joy, only a trust. 
Just then the meeting closed, and, as I went out on the street, I
met a gentleman smoking a fine cigar, and a cloud of smoke came
into my face, and I took a long, deep breath of it, and praise
the Lord, all my appetite for it was gone.  Then as I walked
along the street, passing saloons where the fumes of liquor came
out, I found that all my taste and longing for that accursed
stuff was gone.  Glory to God! . . . [But] for ten or eleven long
years [after that] I was in the wilderness with its ups and
downs.  My appetite for liquor never came back.”
The classic case of Colonel Gardiner is that of a man cured of
sexual temptation in a single hour.  To Mr. Spears the colonel
said, “I was effectually cured of all inclination to that sin I
was so strongly addicted to that I thought nothing but shooting
me through the head could have cured me of it; and all desire and
inclination to it was removed, as entirely as if I had been a
sucking child; nor did the temptation return to this day.”  Mr.
Webster’s words on the same subject are these:  “One thing I have
heard the colonel frequently say, that he was much addicted to
impurity before his acquaintance with religion; but that, so soon
as he was enlightened from above, he felt the power of the Holy
Ghost changing his nature so wonderfully that his sanctification
in this respect seemed more remarkable than in any other."[149]
[149] Doddridge’s Life of Colonel James Gardiner, London
Religious Tract Society, pp. 23-32.
Such rapid abolition of ancient impulses and propensities reminds
us so strongly of what has been observed as the result of
hypnotic suggestion that it is difficult not to believe that
subliminal influences play the decisive part in these abrupt
changes of heart, just as they do in hypnotism.[150] Suggestive
therapeutics abound in records of cure, after a few sittings, of
inveterate bad habits with which the patient, left to ordinary
moral and physical influences, had struggled in vain.  Both
drunkenness and sexual vice have been cured in this way, action
through the subliminal seeming thus in many individuals to have
the prerogative of inducing relatively stable change.  If the
grace of God miraculously operates, it probably operates through
the subliminal door, then.  But just HOW anything operates in
this region is still unexplained, and we shall do well now to say
good-by to the PROCESS of transformation altogether–leaving it,
if you like, a good deal of a psychological or theological
mystery–and to turn our attention to the fruits of the religious
condition, no matter in what way they may have been
produced.[151]
[150] Here, for example, is a case, from Starbuck’s book, in
which a “sensory automatism” brought about quickly what prayers
and resolves had been unable to effect.  The subject is a woman. 
She writes:–
“When I was about forty I tried to quit smoking, but the desire
was on me, and had me in its power.  I cried and prayed and
promised God to quit, but could not.  I had smoked for fifteen
years.  When I was fifty-three, as I sat by the fire one day
smoking, a voice came to me.  I did not hear it with my ears, but
more as a dream or sort of double think.  It said, ’Louisa, lay
down smoking.’  At once I replied. ’Will you take the desire
away?’ But it only kept saying:  ’Louisa, lay down smoking.’ 
Then I got up, laid my pipe on the mantel-shelf, and never smoked
again or had any desire to.  The desire was gone as though I had
never known it or touched tobacco.  The sight of others smoking
and the smell of smoke never gave me the least wish to touch it
again.”    The Psychology of Religion, p. 142.
[151] Professor Starbuck expresses the radical destruction of old
influences physiologically, as a cutting off of the connection
between higher and lower cerebral centres.  “This condition,” he
says, “in which the association-centres connected with the
spiritual life are cut off from the lower, is often reflected in
the way correspondents describe their experiences. . . .  For
example:  ’Temptations from without still assail me, but there is
nothing WITHIN to respond to them.’ The ego [here] is wholly
identified with the higher centres whose quality of feeling is
that of withinness.  Another of the respondents says:  ’Since
then, although Satan tempts me, there is as it were a wall of
brass around me, so that his darts cannot touch me.’"
–Unquestionably, functional exclusions of this sort must occur
in the cerebral organ.  But on the side accessible to
introspection, their causal condition is nothing but the degree
of spiritual excitement, getting at last so high and strong as to
be sovereign, and it must be frankly confessed that we do not
know just why or how such sovereignty comes about in one person
and not in another.  We can only give our imagination a certain
delusive help by mechanical analogies.
If we should conceive, for example, that the human mind, with its
different possibilities of equilibrium, might be like a
many-sided solid with different surfaces on which it could lie
flat, we might liken mental revolutions to the spatial
revolutions of such a body.  As it is pried up, say by a lever,
from a position in which it lies on surface A, for instance, it
will linger for a time unstably halfway up, and if the lever
cease to urge it, it will tumble back or “relapse” under the
continued pull of gravity.  But if at last it rotate far enough
for its centre of gravity to pass beyond surface A altogether,
the body will fall over, on surface B, say, and abide there
permanently.  The pulls of gravity towards A have vanished, and
may now be disregarded. The polyhedron has become immune against
farther attraction from their direction.
In this figure of speech the lever may correspond to the
emotional influences making for a new life, and the initial pull
of gravity to the ancient drawbacks and inhibitions.  So long as
the emotional influence fails to reach a certain pitch of
efficacy, the changes it produces are unstable, and the man
relapses into his original attitude. But when a certain intensity
is attained by the new emotion, a critical point is passed, and
there then ensues an irreversible revolution, equivalent to the
production of a new nature.
The collective name for the ripe fruits of religion in a
character is Saintliness.[152] The saintly character is the
character for which spiritual emotions are the habitual centre of
the personal energy; and there is a certain composite photograph
of universal saintliness, the same in all religions, of which the
features can easily be traced.[153]
[152] I use this word in spite of a certain flavor of
"sanctimoniousness” which sometimes clings to it, because no
other word suggests as well the exact combination of affections
which the text goes on to describe.
[153] “It will be found,” says Dr. W. R. Inge (in his lectures on
Christian Mysticism, London, 1899, p. 326), “that men of
preeminent saintliness agree very closely in what they tell us. 
They tell us that they have arrived at an unshakable conviction,
not based on inference but on immediate experience, that God is a
spirit with whom the human spirit can hold intercourse; that in
him meet all that they can imagine of goodness, truth, and
beauty; that they can see his footprints everywhere in nature,
and feel his presence within them as the very life of their life,
so that in proportion as they come to themselves they come to
him.  They tell us what separates us from him and from happiness
is, first, self-seeking in all its forms; and secondly,
sensuality in all its forms; that these are the ways of darkness
and death, which hide from us the face of God; while the path of
the just is like a shining light, which shineth more and more
unto the perfect day.”
They are these:–
1.  A feeling of being in a wider life than that of this world’s
selfish little interests; and a conviction, not merely
intellectual, but as it were sensible, of the existence of an
Ideal Power.  In Christian saintliness this power is always
personified as God; but abstract moral ideals, civic or patriotic
utopias, or inner versions of holiness or right may also be felt
as the true lords and enlargers of our life, in ways which I
described in the lecture on the Reality of the Unseen.[154]
[154] The “enthusiasm of humanity” may lead to a life which
coalesces in many respects with that of Christian saintliness. 
Take the following rules proposed to members of the Union pour
l’Action morale, in the Bulletin de l’Union, April 1-15, 1894. 
See, also, Revue Bleue, August 13, 1892.
“We would make known in our own persons the usefulness of rule,
of discipline, of resignation and renunciation; we would teach
the necessary perpetuity of suffering, and explain the creative
part which it plays.  We would wage war upon false optimism; on
the base hope of happiness coming to us ready made; on the notion
of a salvation by knowledge alone, or by material civilization
alone, vain symbol as this is of civilization, precarious
external arrangement ill-fitted to replace the intimate union and
consent of souls.  We would wage war also on bad morals, whether
in public or in private life; on luxury, fastidiousness, and
over-refinement, on all that tends to increase the painful,
immoral, and anti-social multiplications of our wants; on all
that excites envy and dislike in the soul of the common people,
and confirms the notion that the chief end of life is freedom to
enjoy.  We would preach by our example the respect of superiors
and equals, the respect of all men; affectionate simplicity in
our relations with inferiors and insignificant persons;
indulgence where our own claims only are concerned, but firmness
in our demands where they relate to duties towards others or
towards the public.
“For the common people are what we help them to become; their
vices are our vices, gazed upon, envied, and imitated; and if
they come back with all their weight upon us, it is but just.
2.  A sense of the friendly continuity of the ideal power with
our own life, and a willing self-surrender to its control.
3.  An immense elation and freedom, as the outlines of the
confining selfhood melt down.
4.  A shifting of the emotional centre towards loving and
harmonious affections, towards “yes, yes,” and away from “no,"
where the claims of the non-ego are concerned. These fundamental
inner conditions have characteristic practical consequences, as
follows:–
a.  Asceticism.–The self-surrender may become so passionate as
to turn into self-immolation.  It may then so over-rule the
ordinary inhibitions of the flesh that the saint finds positive
pleasure in sacrifice and asceticism, measuring and expressing as
they do the degree of his loyalty to the higher power.
b.  Strength of Soul.–The sense of enlargement of life may be so
uplifting that personal motives and inhibitions, commonly
omnipotent, become too insignificant for notice, and new reaches
of patience and fortitude open out.  Fears and anxieties go, and
blissful equanimity takes their place. Come heaven, come hell, it
makes no difference now!
“We forbid ourselves all seeking after popularity, all ambition
to appear important.  We pledge ourselves to abstain from
falsehood, in all its degrees.  We promise not to create or
encourage illusions as to what is possible, by what we say or
write. We promise to one another active sincerity, which strives
to see truth clearly, and which never fears to declare what it
sees.
“We promise deliberate resistance to the tidal waves of fashion,
to the ’booms’ and panics of the public mind, to all the forms of
weakness and of fear.
“We forbid ourselves the use of sarcasm.  Of serious things we
will speak seriously and unsmilingly, without banter and without
the appearance of banter;–and even so of all things, for there
are serious ways of being light of heart.
“We will put ourselves forward always for what we are, simply and
without false humility, as well as without pedantry, affectation,
or pride.”
c.  Purity.–The shifting of the emotional centre brings with it,
first, increase of purity.  The sensitiveness to spiritual
discords is enhanced, and the cleansing of existence from brutal
and sensual elements becomes imperative.  Occasions of contact
with such elements are avoided:  the saintly life must deepen its
spiritual consistency and keep unspotted from the world.  In some
temperaments this need of purity of spirit takes an ascetic turn,
and weaknesses of the flesh are treated with relentless severity.
d.  Charity.–The shifting of the emotional centre brings,
secondly, increase of charity, tenderness for fellow-creatures.
The ordinary motives to antipathy, which usually set such close
bounds to tenderness among human beings, are inhibited. The saint
loves his enemies, and treats loathsome beggars as his brothers.
I now have to give some concrete illustrations of these fruits of
the spiritual tree.  The only difficulty is to choose, for they
are so abundant.
Since the sense of Presence of a higher and friendly power seems
to be the fundamental feature in the spiritual life, I will begin
with that.
In our narratives of conversion we saw how the world might look
shining and transfigured to the convert,[155] and, apart from
anything acutely religious, we all have moments when the
universal life seems to wrap us round with friendliness. In youth
and health, in summer, in the woods or on the mountains, there
come days when the weather seems all whispering with peace, hours
when the goodness and beauty of existence enfold us like a dry
warm climate, or chime through us as if our inner ears were
subtly ringing with the world’s security.  Thoreau writes:–
[155] Above, pp. 243 ff.
“Once, a few weeks after I came to the woods, for an hour I
doubted whether the near neighborhood of man was not essential to
a serene and healthy life.  To be alone was somewhat unpleasant.
But, in the midst of a gentle rain, while these thoughts
prevailed, I was suddenly sensible of such sweet and beneficent
society in Nature, in the very pattering of the drops, and in
<270> every sight and sound around my house, an infinite and
unaccountable friendliness all at once, like an atmosphere,
sustaining me, as made the fancied advantages of human
neighborhood insignificant, and I have never thought of them
since.  Every little pine-needle expanded and swelled with
sympathy and befriended me.  I was so distinctly made aware of
the presence of something kindred to me, that I thought no place
could ever be strange to me again."[156]
[156] H. Thoreau:  Walden, Riverside edition, p. 206, abridged.
In the Christian consciousness this sense of the enveloping
friendliness becomes most personal and definite.  “The
compensation,” writes a German author,–"for the loss of that
sense of personal independence which man so unwillingly gives up,
is the disappearance of all FEAR from one’s life, the quite
indescribable and inexplicable feeling of an inner SECURITY,
which one can only experience, but which, once it has been
experienced, one can never forget."[157]
[157] C. H. Hilty:  Gluck, vol. i. p. 85.
I find an excellent description of this state of mind in a sermon
by Mr. Voysey:–
“It is the experience of myriads of trustful souls, that this
sense of God’s unfailing presence with them in their going out
and in their coming in, and by night and day, is a source of
absolute repose and confident calmness.  It drives away all fear
of what may befall them.  That nearness of God is a constant
security against terror and anxiety.  It is not that they are at
all assured of physical safety, or deem themselves protected by a
love which is denied to others, but that they are in a state of
mind equally ready to be safe or to meet with injury.  If injury
befall them, they will be content to bear it because the Lord is
their keeper, and nothing can befall them without his will.  If
it be his will, then injury is for them a blessing and no
calamity at all.  Thus and thus only is the trustful man
protected and shielded from harm.  And I for one–by no means a
thick-skinned or hard-nerved man-am absolutely satisfied with
this arrangement, and do not wish for any other kind of immunity
from danger and catastrophe.  Quite as sensitive to pain as the
most highly strung organism, I yet feel that the worst of it is
conquered, and the sting taken out of it altogether, by the
thought that God is our loving and sleepless keeper, and that
nothing can hurt us without his will."[158]
[158] The Mystery of Pain and Death, London, 1892, p. 258.
More excited expressions of this condition are abundant in
religious literature.  I could easily weary you with their
monotony. Here is an account from Mrs. Jonathan Edwards:–
“Last night,” Mrs. Edwards writes, “was the sweetest night I
ever had in my life.  I never before, for so long a time
together, enjoyed so much of the light and rest and sweetness of
heaven in my soul, but without the least agitation of body during
the whole time.  Part of the night I lay awake, sometimes asleep,
and sometimes between sleeping and waking.  But all night I
continued in a constant, clear, and lively sense of the heavenly
sweetness of Christ’s excellent love, of his nearness to me, and
of my dearness to him; with an inexpressibly sweet calmness of
soul in an entire rest in him.  I seemed to myself to perceive a
glow of divine love come down from the heart of Christ in heaven
into my heart in a constant stream, like a stream or pencil of
sweet light.  At the same time my heart and soul all flowed out
in love to Christ, so that there seemed to be a constant flowing
and reflowing of heavenly love, and I appeared to myself to float
or swim, in these bright, sweet beams, like the motes swimming in
the beams of the sun, or the streams of his light which come in
at the window.  I think that what I felt each minute was worth
more than all the outward comfort and pleasure which I had
enjoyed in my whole life put together.  It was pleasure, without
the least sting, or any interruption.  It was a sweetness, which
my soul was lost in; it seemed to be all that my feeble frame
could sustain.  There was but little difference, whether I was
asleep or awake, but if there was any difference, the sweetness
was greatest while I was asleep.[159]  As I awoke early the next
morning, it seemed to me that I had entirely done with myself.  I
felt that the opinions of the world concerning me were nothing,
and that I had no more to do with any outward interest of my own
than with that of a person whom I never saw. The glory of God
seemed to swallow up every wish and desire of my heart. . . .
After retiring to rest and sleeping a little while, I awoke, and
was led to reflect on God’s mercy to me, in giving me, for many
years, a willingness to die; and after that, in making me willing
to live, that I might do and suffer whatever he called me to
here.  I also thought how God had graciously given me an entire
resignation to his will, with respect to the kind and manner of
death that I should die; having been made willing to die on the
rack, or at the stake, and if it were God’s will, to die in
darkness.  But now it occurred to me, I used to think of living
no longer than to the ordinary age of man.  Upon this I was led
to ask myself, whether I was not willing to be kept out of heaven
even longer; and my whole heart seemed immediately to reply: 
Yes, a thousand years, and a thousand in horror, if it be most
for the honor of God, the torment of my body being so great,
awful, and overwhelming that none could bear to live in the
country where the spectacle was seen, and the torment of my mind
being vastly greater.  And it seemed to me that I found a perfect
willingness, quietness, and alacrity of soul in consenting that
it should be so, if it were most for the glory of God, so that
there was no hesitation, doubt, or darkness in my mind.  The
glory of God seemed to overcome me and swallow me up, and every
conceivable suffering, and everything that was terrible to my
nature, seemed to shrink to nothing before it.  This resignation
continued in its clearness and brightness the rest of the night,
and all the next day, and the night following, and on Monday in
the forenoon, without interruption or abatement."[160]
[159] Compare Madame Guyon:  “It was my practice to arise at
midnight for purposes of devotion. . . . It seemed to me that
God came at the precise time and woke me from sleep in order that
I might enjoy him.  When I was out of health or greatly fatigued,
he did not awake me, but at such times I felt, even in my sleep,
a singular possession of God.  He loved me so much that he seemed
to pervade my being, at a time when I could be only imperfectly
conscious of his presence.  My sleep is sometimes broken–a sort
of half sleep; but my soul seems to be awake enough to know God,
when it is hardly capable of knowing anything else.”  T. C.
Upham:  The Life and Religious Experiences of Madame de la Mothe
Guyon, New York, 1877, vol. i. p. 260.
[160] I have considerably abridged the words of the original,
which is given in Edwards’s Narrative of the Revival in New
England.
The annals of Catholic saintship abound in records as ecstatic or
more ecstatic than this.  “Often the assaults of the divine
love,” it is said of the Sister Seraphique de la Martiniere,
"reduced her almost to the point of death.  She used tenderly to
complain of this to God.  ’I cannot support it,’ she used to say.
’Bear gently with my weakness, or I shall expire under the
violence of your love.’"[161]
[161] Bougaud:  Hist. de la Bienheureuse Marguerite Marie, 1894,
p. 125.
Let me pass next to the Charity and Brotherly Love which are a
usual fruit of saintliness, and have always been reckoned
essential theological virtues, however limited may have been the
kinds of service which the particular theology enjoined.
Brotherly love would follow logically from the assurance of God’s
friendly presence, the notion of our brotherhood as men being an
immediate inference from that of God’s fatherhood of us all. 
When Christ utters the precepts:  “Love your enemies, bless them
that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them
which despitefully use you, and persecute you,” he gives for a
reason:  “That ye may be the children of your Father which is in
heaven:  for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the
good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust.”  One
might therefore be tempted to explain both the humility as to
one’s self and the charity towards others which characterize
spiritual excitement, as results of the all-leveling character of
theistic belief.  But these affections are certainly not mere
derivatives of theism.  We find them in Stoicism, in Hinduism,
and in Buddhism in the highest possible degree. They HARMONIZE
with paternal theism beautifully; but they harmonize with all
reflection whatever upon the dependence of mankind on general
causes; and we must, I think, consider them not subordinate but
coordinate parts of that great complex excitement in the study of
which we are engaged. Religious rapture, moral enthusiasm,
ontological wonder, cosmic emotion, are all unifying states of
mind, in which the sand and grit of the selfhood incline to
disappear, and tenderness to rule.  The best thing is to describe
the condition integrally as a characteristic affection to which
our nature is liable, a region in which we find ourselves at
home, a sea in which we swim; but not to pretend to explain its
parts by deriving them too cleverly from one another.  Like love
or fear, the faith-state is a natural psychic complex, and
carries charity with it by organic consequence.  Jubilation is an
expansive affection, and all expansive affections are
self-forgetful and kindly so long as they endure.
We find this the case even when they are pathological in origin. 
In his instructive work, la Tristesse et la Joie,[162] M. Georges
Dumas compares together the melancholy and the joyous phase of
circular insanity, and shows that, while selfishness
characterizes the one, the other is marked by altruistic
impulses.  No human being so stingy and useless as was Marie in
her melancholy period!  But the moment the happy period begins,
"sympathy and kindness become her characteristic sentiments.  She
displays a universal goodwill, not only of intention, but in act.
. . .  She becomes solicitous of the health of other patients,
interested in getting them out, desirous to procure wool to knit
socks for some of them. Never since she has been under my
observation have I heard her in her joyous period utter any but
charitable opinions."[163]  And later, Dr. Dumas says of all such
joyous conditions that “unselfish sentiments and tender emotions
are the only affective states to be found in them.  The subject’s
mind is closed against envy, hatred, and vindictiveness, and
wholly transformed into benevolence, indulgence, and mercy."[164]
[162] Paris, 1900.
[163] Page 130.
[164] Page 167.
There is thus an organic affinity between joyousness and
tenderness, and their companionship in the saintly life need in
no way occasion surprise.  Along with the happiness, this
increase of tenderness is often noted in narratives of
conversion. “I began to work for others";–"I had more tender
feeling for my family and friends";–"I spoke at once to a person
with whom I had been angry";–"I felt for every one, and loved my
friends better";–"I felt every one to be my friend";–these are
so many expressions from the records collected by Professor
Starbuck.[165]
[165] Op. cit., p. 127.
“When,” says Mrs. Edwards, continuing the narrative from which I
made quotation a moment ago, “I arose on the morning of the
Sabbath, I felt a love to all mankind, wholly peculiar in its
strength and sweetness, far beyond all that I had ever felt
before.  The power of that love seemed inexpressible.  I thought,
if I were surrounded by enemies, who were venting their malice
and cruelty upon me, in tormenting me, it would still be
impossible that I should cherish any feelings towards them but
those of love, and pity, and ardent desires for their happiness. 
I never before felt so far from a disposition to judge and
censure others, as I did that morning.  I realized also, in an
unusual and very lively manner, how great a part of Christianity
lies in the performance of our social and relative duties to one
another.  The same joyful sense continued throughout the day–a
sweet love to God and all mankind.”
Whatever be the explanation of the charity, it may efface all
usual human barriers.[166]
[166] The barrier between men and animals also.  We read of
Towianski, an eminent Polish patriot and mystic, that “one day
one of his friends met him in the rain, caressing a big dog which
was jumping upon him and covering him horribly with mud.  On
being asked why he permitted the animal thus to dirty his
clothes, Towianski replied:  ’This dog, whom I am now meeting for
the first time, has shown a great fellow-feeling for me, and a
great joy in my recognition and acceptance of his greetings. 
Were I to drive him off, I should wound his feelings and do him a
moral injury.  It would be an offense not only to him, but to all
the spirits of the other world who are on the same level with
him.  The damage which he does to my coat is as nothing in
comparison with the wrong which I should inflict upon him, in
case I were to remain indifferent to the manifestations of his
friendship.  We ought,’ he added, ’both to lighten the condition
of animals, whenever we can, and at the same time to facilitate
in ourselves that union of the world of all spirits, which the
sacrifice of Christ has made possible.’” Andre Towianski,
Traduction de l’Italien, Turin, 1897 (privately printed).  I owe
my knowledge of this book and of Towianski to my friend Professor
W. Lutoslawski, author of “Plato’s Logic.”
Here, for instance, is an example of Christian non-resistance
from Richard Weaver’s autobiography.  Weaver was a collier, a
semi-professional pugilist in his younger days, who became a much
beloved evangelist.  Fighting, after drinking, seems to have been
the sin to which he originally felt his flesh most perversely
inclined.  After his first conversion he had a backsliding, which
consisted in pounding a man who had insulted a girl.  Feeling
that, having once fallen, he might as well be hanged for a sheep
as for a lamb, he got drunk and went and broke the jaw of another
man who had lately challenged him to fight and taunted him with
cowardice for refusing as a Christian man;–I mention these
incidents to show how genuine a change of heart is implied in the
later conduct which he describes as follows:–
“I went down the drift and found the boy crying because a
fellow-workman was trying to take the wagon from him by force.  I
said to him:–
“’Tom, you mustn’t take that wagon.’
“He swore at me, and called me a Methodist devil.  I told him
that God did not tell me to let him rob me.  He cursed again, and
said he would push the wagon over me.
“’Well,’ I said, ’let us see whether the devil and thee are
stronger than the Lord and me.’
“And the Lord and I proving stronger than the devil and he, he
had to get out of the way, or the wagon would have gone over him.
So I gave the wagon to the boy.  Then said Tom:–
“’I’ve a good mind to smack thee on the face.’
“’Well,’ I said, ’if that will do thee any good, thou canst do
it.’ So he struck me on the face.
“I turned the other cheek to him, and said, ’Strike again.’
“He struck again and again, till he had struck me five times. I
turned my cheek for the sixth stroke; but he turned away cursing.
I shouted after him:  ’The Lord forgive thee, for I do, and the
Lord save thee.’
“This was on a Saturday; and when I went home from the coal-pit
my wife saw my face was swollen, and asked what was the matter
with it.  I said:  ’I’ve been fighting, and I’ve given a man a
good thrashing.’
“She burst out weeping, and said, ’O Richard, what made you
fight?’ Then I told her all about it; and she thanked the Lord I
had not struck back.
“But the Lord had struck, and his blows have more effect than
man’s.  Monday came.  The devil began to tempt me, saying:  ’The
other men will laugh at thee for allowing Tom to treat thee as he
did on Saturday.’ I cried, ’Get thee behind me, Satan;’–and went
on my way to the coal-pit.
“Tom was the first man I saw.  I said ’Good-morning,’ but got no
reply.
“He went down first.  When I got down, I was surprised to see him
sitting on the wagon-road waiting for me.  When I came to him he
burst into tears and said:  ’Richard, will you forgive me for
striking you?’
“’I have forgiven thee,’ said I; ’ask God to forgive thee.  The
Lord bless thee.’ I gave him my hand, and we went each to his
work."[167]
[167] J. Patterson’s Life of Richard Weaver, pp. 66-68, abridged.
“Love your enemies!”  Mark you, not simply those who happen not
to be your friends, but your ENEMIES, your positive and active
enemies.  Either this is a mere Oriental hyperbole, a bit of
verbal extravagance, meaning only that we should, as far as we
can, abate our animosities, or else it is sincere and literal. 
Outside of certain cases of intimate individual relation, it
seldom has been taken literally.  Yet it makes one ask the
question:  Can there in general be a level of emotion so
unifying, so obliterative of differences between man and man,
that even enmity may come to be an irrelevant circumstance and
fail to inhibit the friendlier interests aroused?  If positive
well-wishing could attain so supreme a degree of excitement,
those who were swayed by it might well seem superhuman beings. 
Their life would be morally discrete from the life of other men,
and there is no saying, in the absence of positive experience of
an authentic kind–for there are few active examples in our
scriptures, and the Buddhistic examples are legendary,[168]–what
the effects might be:  they might conceivably transform the
world.
[168] As where the future Buddha, incarnated as a hare, jumps
into the fire to cook himself for a meal for a beggar–having
previously shaken himself three times, so that none of the
insects in his fur should perish with him.
Psychologically and in principle, the precept “Love your enemies"
is not self-contradictory.  It is merely the extreme limit of a
kind of magnanimity with which, in the shape of pitying tolerance
of our oppressors, we are fairly familiar. Yet if radically
followed, it would involve such a breach with our instinctive
springs of action as a whole, and with the present world’s
arrangements, that a critical point would practically be passed,
and we should be born into another kingdom of being.  Religious
emotion makes us feel that other kingdom to be close at hand,
within our reach.
The inhibition of instinctive repugnance is proved not only by
the showing of love to enemies, but by the showing of it to any
one who is personally loathsome.  In the annals of saintliness we
find a curious mixture of motives impelling in this direction. 
Asceticism plays its part; and along with charity pure and
simple, we find humility or the desire to disclaim distinction
and to grovel on the common level before God.  Certainly all
three principles were at work when Francis of Assisi and Ignatius
Loyola exchanged their garments with those of filthy beggars. 
All three are at work when religious persons consecrate their
lives to the care of leprosy or other peculiarly unpleasant
diseases.  The nursing of the sick is a function to which the
religious seem strongly drawn, even apart from the fact that
church traditions set that way.  But in the annals of this sort
of charity we find fantastic excesses of devotion recorded which
are only explicable by the frenzy of self-immolation
simultaneously aroused.  Francis of Assisi kisses his lepers;
Margaret Mary Alacoque, Francis Xavier, St.  John of God, and
others are said to have cleansed the sores and ulcers of their
patients with their respective tongues; and the lives of such
saints as Elizabeth of Hungary and Madame de Chantal are full of
a sort of reveling in hospital purulence, disagreeable to read
of, and which makes us admire and shudder at the same time.
So much for the human love aroused by the faith-state. Let me
next speak of the Equanimity, Resignation, Fortitude, and
Patience which it brings.
“A paradise of inward tranquillity” seems to be faith’s usual
result; and it is easy, even without being religious one’s self,
to understand this.  A moment back, in treating of the sense of
God’s presence, I spoke of the unaccountable feeling of safety
which one may then have.  And, indeed, how can it possibly fail
to steady the nerves, to cool the fever, and appease the fret, if
one be sensibly conscious that, no matter what one’s difficulties
for the moment may appear to be, one’s life as a whole is in the
keeping of a power whom one can absolutely trust?  In deeply
religious men the abandonment of self to this power is
passionate.  Whoever not only says, but FEELS, “God’s will be
done,” is mailed against every weakness; and the whole historic
array of martyrs, missionaries, and religious reformers is there
to prove the tranquil-mindedness, under naturally agitating or
distressing circumstances, which self-surrender brings.
The temper of the tranquil-mindedness differs, of course,
according as the person is of a constitutionally sombre or of a
constitutionally cheerful cast of mind.  In the sombre it
partakes more of resignation and submission; in the cheerful it
is a joyous consent.  As an example of the former temper, I quote
part of a letter from Professor Lagneau, a venerated teacher of
philosophy who lately died, a great invalid, at Paris:–
“My life, for the success of which you send good wishes, will be
what it is able to be.  I ask nothing from it, I expect nothing
from it.  For long years now I exist, think, and act, and am
worth what I am worth, only through the despair which is my sole
strength and my sole foundation.  May it preserve for me, even in
these last trials to which I am coming, the courage to do without
the desire of deliverance.  I ask nothing more from the Source
whence all strength cometh, and if that is granted, your wishes
will have been accomplished."[169]
[169] Bulletin de l’Union pour l’Action Morale, September, 1894.
There is something pathetic and fatalistic about this, but the
power of such a tone as a protection against outward shocks is
manifest.  Pascal is another Frenchman of pessimistic  <281>
natural temperament.  He expresses still more amply the temper of
self-surrendering submissiveness:–
“Deliver me, Lord,” he writes in his prayers, “from the sadness
at my proper suffering which self-love might give, but put into
me a sadness like your own.  Let my sufferings appease your
choler.  Make them an occasion for my conversion and salvation. I
ask you neither for health nor for sickness, for life nor for
death; but that you may dispose of my health and my sickness, my
life and my death, for your glory, for my salvation, and for the
use of the Church and of your saints, of whom I would by your
grace be one.  You alone know what is expedient for me; you are
the sovereign master; do with me according to your will.  Give to
me, or take away from me, only conform my will to yours.  I know
but one thing, Lord, that it is good to follow you, and bad to
offend you.  Apart from that, I know not what is good or bad in
anything.  I know not which is most profitable to me, health or
sickness, wealth or poverty, nor anything else in the world. 
That discernment is beyond the power of men or angels, and is
hidden among the secrets of your Providence, which I adore, but
do not seek to fathom."[170]
[170] B. Pascal:  Prieres pour les Maladies, Sections xiii.,
xiv., abridged.
When we reach more optimistic temperaments, the resignation grows
less passive.  Examples are sown so broadcast throughout history
that I might well pass on without citation.  As it is, I snatch
at the first that occurs to my mind.  Madame Guyon, a frail
creature physically, was yet of a happy native disposition.  She
went through many perils with admirable serenity of soul.  After
being sent to prison for heresy–
“Some of my friends,” she writes, “wept bitterly at the hearing
of it, but such was my state of acquiescence and resignation that
it failed to draw any tears from me. . . . There appeared to be
in me then, as I find it to be in me now, such an entire loss of
what regards myself, that any of my own interests gave me little
pain or pleasure; ever wanting to will or wish for myself only
the very thing which God does.”  In another place she writes: 
"We all of us came near perishing in a river which we found it
necessary to pass.  The carriage sank in the quicksand. Others
who were with us threw themselves out in excessive fright.  But I
found my thoughts so much taken up with God that I had no
distinct sense of danger.  It is true that the thought of being
drowned passed across my mind, but it cost no other sensation or
reflection in me than this–that I felt quite contented and
willing it were so, if it were my heavenly Father’s choice.” 
Sailing from Nice to Genoa, a storm keeps her eleven days at sea.
“As the irritated waves dashed round us,” she writes, “I could
not help experiencing a certain degree of satisfaction in my
mind.  I pleased myself with thinking that those mutinous
billows, under the command of Him who does all things rightly,
might probably furnish me with a watery grave.  Perhaps I carried
the point too far, in the pleasure which I took in thus seeing
myself beaten and bandied by the swelling waters. Those who were
with me took notice of my intrepidity."[171]
[171] From Thomas C. Upham’s Life and Religious Opinions and
Experiences of Madame de la Mothe Guyon, New York, 1877, ii. 48,
i. 141, 413, abridged.
The contempt of danger which religious enthusiasm produces may be
even more buoyant still.  I take an example from that charming
recent autobiography, “With Christ at Sea,” by Frank Bullen.  A
couple of days after he went through the conversion on shipboard
of which he there gives an account–
“It was blowing stiffly,” he writes, “and we were carrying a
press of canvas to get north out of the bad weather.  Shortly
after four bells we hauled down the flying-jib, and I sprang out
astride the boom to furl it.  I was sitting astride the boom when
suddenly it gave way with me.  The sail slipped through my
fingers, and I fell backwards, hanging head downwards over the
seething tumult of shining foam under the ship’s bows, suspended
by one foot.  But I felt only high exultation in my certainty 
of eternal life.  Although death was divided from me by a hair’s
breadth, and I was acutely conscious of the fact, it gave me no
sensation but joy.  I suppose I could have hung there no longer
than five seconds, but in that time I lived a whole age of
delight.  But my body asserted itself, and with a desperate
gymnastic effort I regained the boom.  How I furled the sail I
don’t know, but I sang at the utmost pitch of my voice praises to
God that went pealing out over the dark waste of waters."[172]
[172] Op. cit., London, 1901, p. 230.
The annals of martyrdom are of course the signal field of triumph
for religious imperturbability.  Let me cite as an example the
statement of a humble sufferer, persecuted as a Huguenot under
Louis XIV:–
“They shut all the doors,” Blanche Gamond writes, “and I saw six
women, each with a bunch of willow rods as thick as the hand
could hold, and a yard long.  He gave me the order, ’Undress
yourself,’ which I did.  He said, ’You are leaving on your shift;
you must take it off.’  They had so little patience that they
took it off themselves, and I was naked from the waist up. They
brought a cord with which they tied me to a beam in the kitchen. 
They drew the cord tight with all their strength and asked me,
’Does it hurt you?’ and then they discharged their fury upon me,
exclaiming as they struck me, ’Pray now to your God.’  It was the
Roulette woman who held this language.  But at this moment I
received the greatest consolation that I can ever receive in my
life, since I had the honor of being whipped for the name of
Christ, and in addition of being crowned with his mercy and his
consolations.  Why can I not write down the inconceivable
influences, consolations, and peace which I felt interiorly?  To
understand them one must have passed by the same trial; they were
so great that I was ravished, for there where afflictions abound
grace is given superabundantly.  In vain the women cried, ’We
must double our blows; she does not feel them, for she neither
speaks nor cries.’  And how should I have cried, since I was
swooning with happiness within?"[173]
[173] Claparede et Goty:  Deux Heroines de la Foi, Paris, 1880,
p. 112.
The transition from tenseness, self-responsibility, and worry, to
equanimity, receptivity, and peace, is the most wonderful of all
those shiftings of inner equilibrium, those changes of the
personal centre of energy, which I have analyzed so often; and
the chief wonder of it is that it so often comes about, not by
doing, but by simply relaxing and throwing the burden down.  This
abandonment of self-responsibility seems to be the fundamental
act in specifically religious, as distinguished from moral
practice.  It antedates theologies and is independent of
philosophies.  Mind-cure, theosophy, stoicism, ordinary
neurological hygiene, insist on it as emphatically as
Christianity does, and it is capable of entering into closest
marriage with every speculative creed.[174]  Christians who have
it strongly live in what is called “recollection,” and are never
anxious about the future, nor worry over the outcome of the day. 
Of Saint Catharine of Genoa it is said that “she took cognizance
of things, only as they were presented to her in succession,
MOMENT BY MOMENT.”  To her holy soul, “the divine moment was the
present moment, . . . and when the present moment was estimated
in itself and in its relations, and when the duty that was
involved in it was accomplished, it was permitted to pass away as
if it had never been, and to give way to the facts and duties of
the moment which came after."[175]  Hinduism, mind-cure, and
theosophy all lay great emphasis upon this concentration of the
consciousness upon the moment at hand.
[174] Compare these three different statements of it:  A. P.
Call:  As a Matter of Course, Boston, 1894; H. W. Dresser: 
Living by the Spirit, New York and London, 1900; H. W. Smith: 
The Christian’s Secret of a Happy Life, published by the Willard
Tract Repository, and now in thousands of hands.
[175] T. C. Upham:  Life of Madame Catharine Adorna, 3d ed.,
New York, 1864, pp. 158, 172-74.
The next religious symptom which I will note is what have called
Purity of Life.  The saintly person becomes exceedingly sensitive
to inner inconsistency or discord, and mixture and confusion grow
intolerable.  All the mind’s objects and occupations must be
ordered with reference to the special spiritual excitement which
is now its keynote.  Whatever is unspiritual taints the pure
water of the soul and is repugnant.  Mixed with this exaltation
of the moral sensibilities there is also an ardor of sacrifice,
for the beloved deity’s sake, of everything unworthy of him. 
Sometimes the spiritual ardor is so sovereign that purity is
achieved at a stroke –we have seen examples.  Usually it is a
more gradual conquest.  Billy Bray’s account of his abandonment
of tobacco is a good example of the latter form of achievement.
“I had been a smoker as well as a drunkard, and I used to love my
tobacco as much as I loved my meat, and I would rather go down
into the mine without my dinner than without my pipe.  In the
days of old, the Lord spoke by the mouths of his servants, the
prophets; now he speaks to us by the spirit of his Son.  I had
not only the feeling part of religion, but I could hear the
small, still voice within speaking to me.  When I took the pipe
to smoke, it would be applied within, ’It is an idol, a lust;
worship the Lord with clean lips.’  So, I felt it was not right
to smoke.  The Lord also sent a woman to convince me.  I was one
day in a house, and I took out my pipe to light it at the fire,
and Mary Hawke–for that was the woman’s name–said, ’Do you not
feel it is wrong to smoke?’  I said that I felt something inside
telling me that it was an idol, a lust, and she said that was the
Lord.  Then I said, ’Now, I must give it up, for the Lord is
telling me of it inside, and the woman outside, so the tobacco
must go, love it as I may.’  There and then I took the tobacco
out of my pocket, and threw it into the fire, and put the pipe
under my foot, ’ashes to ashes, dust to dust.’  And I have not
smoked since.  I found it hard to break off old habits, but I
cried to the Lord for help, and he gave me strength, for he has
said, ’Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver
thee.’  The day after I gave up smoking I had the toothache so
bad that I did not know what to do.  I thought this was owing to
giving up the pipe, but I said I would never smoke again, if I
lost every tooth in my head.  I said, ’Lord, thou hast told us My
yoke is easy and my burden is light,’ and when I said that, all
the pain left me.  Sometimes the thought of the pipe would come
back to me very strong; but the Lord strengthened me against the
habit, and, bless his name, I have not smoked since.”
Bray’s biographer writes that after he had given up smoking, he
thought that he would chew a little, but he conquered this dirty
habit, too.  “On one occasion,” Bray said, “when at a prayer-
meeting at Hicks Mill, I heard the Lord say to me, ’Worship me
with clean lips.’  So, when we got up from our knees, I took the
quid out of my mouth and ’whipped ’en’ [threw it] under the form.
But, when we got on our knees again, I put another quid into my
mouth.  Then the Lord said to me again, ’Worship me with clean
lips.’  So I took the quid out of my mouth, and whipped ’en under
the form again, and said, ’Yes, Lord, I will.’  From that time I
gave up chewing as well as smoking, and have been a free man.”
The ascetic forms which the impulse for veracity and purity of
life may take are often pathetic enough.  The early Quakers, for
example, had hard battles to wage against the worldliness and
insincerity of the ecclesiastical Christianity of their time. 
Yet the battle that cost them most wounds was probably that which
they fought in defense of their own right to social veracity and
sincerity in their thee-ing and thou-ing, in not doffing the hat
or giving titles of respect. It was laid on George Fox that these
conventional customs were a lie and a sham, and the whole body of
his followers thereupon renounced them, as a sacrifice to truth,
and so that their acts and the spirit they professed might be
more in accord.
“When the Lord sent me into the world,” says Fox in his Journal,
"he forbade me to put off my hat to any, high or low: and I was
required to ’thee’ and ’thou’ all men and women, without any
respect to rich or poor, great or small.  And as I traveled up
and down, I was not to bid people Good-morning or Good-evening,
neither might I bow or scrape with my leg to any one.  This made
the sects and professions rage.  Oh! the rage that was in the
priests, magistrates, professors, and people of all sorts:  and
especially in priests and professors:  for though ’thou’ to a
single person was according to their accidence and grammar rules,
and according to the Bible, yet they could not bear to hear it: 
and because I could not put off my hat to them, it set them all
into a rage. . . . Oh! the scorn, heat, and fury that arose!  Oh!
the blows, punchings, beatings, and imprisonments that we
underwent for not putting off our hats to men!  Some had their
hats violently plucked off and thrown away, so that they quite
lost them.  The bad language and evil usage we received on this
account is hard to be expressed, besides the danger we were
sometimes in of losing our lives for this matter, and that by the
great professors of Christianity, who thereby discovered they
were not true believers.  And though it was but a small thing in
the eye of man, yet a wonderful confusion it brought among all
professors and priests:  but, blessed be the Lord, many came to
see the vanity of that custom of putting off hats to men, and
felt the weight of Truth’s testimony against it.”
In the autobiography of Thomas Elwood, an early Quaker, who at
one time was secretary to John Milton, we find an exquisitely
quaint and candid account of the trials he underwent both at home
and abroad, in following Fox’s canons of sincerity.  The
anecdotes are too lengthy for citation; but Elwood sets down his
manner of feeling about these things in a shorter passage, which
I will quote as a characteristic utterance of spiritual
sensibility:–
“By this divine light, then,” says Elwood, “I saw that though I
had not the evil of the common uncleanliness, debauchery,
profaneness, and pollutions of the world to put away, because I
had, through the great goodness of God and a civil education,
been preserved out of those grosser evils, yet I had many other
evils to put away and to cease from; some of which were not by
the world, which lies in wickedness (I John v. 19), accounted
evils, but by the light of Christ were made manifest to me to be
evils, and as such condemned in me.
“As particularly those fruits and effects of pride that discover
themselves in the vanity and superfluity of apparel; which I took
too much delight in.  This evil of my doings I was required to
put away and cease from; and judgment lay upon me till I did so.
“I took off from my apparel those unnecessary trimmings of lace,
ribbons, and useless buttons, which had no real service, but were
set on only for that which was by mistake called ornament; and I
ceased to wear rings.
“Again, the giving of flattering titles to men between whom and
me there was not any relation to which such titles could be
pretended to belong.  This was an evil I had been much addicted
to, and was accounted a ready artist in; therefore this evil also
was I required to put away and cease from.  So that thenceforward
I durst not say, Sir, Master, My Lord, Madam (or My Dame); or say
Your Servant to any one to whom I did not stand in the real
relation of a servant, which I had never done to any.
“Again, respect of persons, in uncovering the head and bowing the
knee or body in salutation, was a practice I had been much in the
use of; and this, being one of the vain customs of the world,
introduced by the spirit of the world, instead of the true honor
which this is a false representation of, and used in deceit as a
token of respect by persons one to another, who bear no real
respect one to another; and besides this, being a type and a
proper emblem of that divine honor which all ought to pay to
Almighty God, and which all of all sorts, who take upon them the
Christian name, appear in when they offer their prayers to him,
and therefore should not be given to men;–I found this to be one
of those evils which I had been too long doing; therefore I was
now required to put it away and cease from it.
“Again, the corrupt and unsound form of speaking in the plural
number to a single person, YOU to one, instead of THOU, contrary
to the pure, plain, and single language of truth, THOU to one,
and YOU to more than one, which had always been used by God to
men, and men to God, as well as one to another, from the oldest
record of time till corrupt men, for corrupt ends, in later and
corrupt times, to flatter, fawn, and work upon the corrupt nature
in men, brought in that false and senseless way of speaking you
to one, which has since corrupted the modern languages, and hath
greatly debased the spirits and depraved the manners of
men;–this evil custom I had been as forward in as others, and
this I was now called out of and required to cease from.
“These and many more evil customs which had sprung up in the
night of darkness and general apostasy from the truth and true
religion were now, by the inshining of this pure ray of divine
light in my conscience, gradually discovered to me to be what I
ought to cease from, shun, and stand a witness against."[176]
[176] The History of Thomas Elwood, written by Himself, London,
1885, pp. 32-34
These early Quakers were Puritans indeed.  The slightest
inconsistency between profession and deed jarred some of them to
active protest.  John Woolman writes in his diary:–
“In these journeys I have been where much cloth hath been dyed;
and have at sundry times walked over ground where much of their
dyestuffs has drained away.  This hath produced a longing in my
mind that people might come into cleanness of spirit, cleanness
of person, and cleanness about their houses and garments.  Dyes
being invented partly to please the eye, and partly to hide dirt,
I have felt in this weak state, when traveling in dirtiness, and
affected with unwholesome scents, a strong desire that the nature
of dyeing cloth to hide dirt may be more fully considered.
“Washing our garments to keep them sweet is cleanly, but it is
the opposite to real cleanliness to hide dirt in them.  Through
giving way to hiding dirt in our garments a spirit which would
conceal that which is disagreeable is strengthened.  Real
cleanliness becometh a holy people; but hiding that which is not
clean by coloring our garments seems contrary to the sweetness of
sincerity.  Through some sorts of dyes cloth is rendered less
useful. And if the value of dyestuffs, and expense of dyeing, and
the damage done to cloth, were all added together, and that cost
applied to keeping all sweet and clean, how much more would real
cleanliness prevail.
“Thinking often on these things, the use of hats and garments
dyed with a dye hurtful to them, and wearing more clothes in
summer than are useful, grew more uneasy to me; believing them to
be customs which have not their foundation in pure wisdom.  The
apprehension of being singular from my beloved friends was a
strait upon me; and thus I continued in the use of some things,
contrary to my judgment, about nine months.  Then I thought of
getting a hat the natural color of the fur, but the apprehension
of being looked upon as one affecting singularity felt uneasy to
me.  On this account I was under close exercise of mind in the
time of our general spring meeting in 1762, greatly desiring to
be rightly directed; when, being deeply bowed in spirit before
the Lord, I was made willing to submit to what I apprehended was
required of me; and when I returned home, got a hat of the
natural color of the fur.
“In attending meetings, this singularity was a trial to me, and
more especially at this time, as white hats were used by some who
were fond of following the changeable modes of dress, and as some
friends, who knew not from what motives I wore it, grew shy of
me, I felt my way for a time shut up in the exercise of the
ministry.  Some friends were apprehensive that my wearing such a
hat savored of an affected singularity:  those who spoke with me
in a friendly way, I generally informed in a few words, that I
believed my wearing it was not in my own will.”
When the craving for moral consistency and purity is developed to
this degree, the subject may well find the outer world too full
of shocks to dwell in, and can unify his life and keep his soul
unspotted only by withdrawing from it. That law which impels the
artist to achieve harmony in his composition by simply dropping
out whatever jars, or suggests a discord, rules also in the
spiritual life.  To omit, says Stevenson, is the one art in
literature:  “If I knew how to omit, I should ask no other
knowledge.”  And life, when full of disorder and slackness and
vague superfluity, can no more have what we call character than
literature can have it under similar conditions.  So monasteries
and communities of sympathetic devotees open their doors, and in
their changeless order, characterized by omissions quite as much
as constituted of actions, the holy-minded person finds that
inner smoothness and cleanness which it is torture to him to feel
violated at every turn by the discordancy and brutality of
secular existence.
That the scrupulosity of purity may be carried to a fantastic
extreme must be admitted.  In this it resembles Asceticism, to
which further symptom of saintliness we had better turn next. 
The adjective “ascetic” is applied to conduct originating on
diverse psychological levels, which I might as well begin by
distinguishing from one another.
1.  Asceticism may be a mere expression of organic hardihood,
disgusted with too much ease.
2.  Temperance in meat and drink, simplicity of apparel,
chastity, and non-pampering of the body generally, may be fruits
of the love of purity, shocked by whatever savors of the sensual.
3.  They may also be fruits of love, that is, they may appeal to
the subject in the light of sacrifices which he is happy in
making to the Deity whom he acknowledges.
4.  Again, ascetic mortifications and torments may be due to
pessimistic feelings about the self, combined with theological
beliefs concerning expiation.  The devotee may feel that he is
buying himself free, or escaping worse sufferings hereafter, by
doing penance now.
5.  In psychopathic persons, mortifications may be entered on
irrationally, by a sort of obsession or fixed idea which comes as
a challenge and must be worked off, because only thus does the
subject get his interior consciousness feeling right again.
6.  Finally, ascetic exercises may in rarer instances be prompted
by genuine perversions of the bodily sensibility, in consequence
of which normally pain-giving stimuli are actually felt as
pleasures.
I will try to give an instance under each of these heads in turn;
but it is not easy to get them pure, for in cases pronounced
enough to be immediately classed as ascetic, several of the
assigned motives usually work together.  Moreover, before citing
any examples at all, I must invite you to some general
psychological considerations which apply to all of them alike.
A strange moral transformation has within the past century swept
over our Western world.  We no longer think that we are called on
to face physical pain with equanimity. It is not expected of a
man that he should either endure it or inflict much of it, and to
listen to the recital of cases of it makes our flesh creep
morally as well as physically.  The way in which our ancestors
looked upon pain as an eternal ingredient of the world’s order,
and both caused and suffered it as a matter-of-course portion of
their day’s work, fills us with amazement.  We wonder that any
human beings could have been so callous.  The result of this
historic alteration is that even in the Mother Church herself,
where ascetic discipline has such a fixed traditional prestige as
a factor of merit, it has largely come into desuetude, if not
discredit.  A believer who flagellates or “macerates” himself
today arouses more wonder and fear than emulation.  Many Catholic
writers who admit that the times have changed in this respect do
so resignedly; and even add that perhaps it is as well not to
waste feelings in regretting the matter, for to return to the
heroic corporeal discipline of ancient days might be an
extravagance.
Where to seek the easy and the pleasant seems instinctive
–and instinctive it appears to be in man; any deliberate
tendency to pursue the hard and painful as such and for their own
sakes might well strike one as purely abnormal.  Nevertheless, in
moderate degrees it is natural and even usual to human nature to
court the arduous.  It is only the extreme manifestations of the
tendency that can be regarded as a paradox.
The psychological reasons for this lie near the surface. When we
drop abstractions and take what we call our will in the act, we
see that it is a very complex function.  It involves both
stimulations and inhibitions; it follows generalized habits; it
is escorted by reflective criticisms; and it leaves a good or a
bad taste of itself behind, according to the manner of the
performance.  The result is that, quite apart from the immediate
pleasure which any sensible experience may give us, our own
general moral attitude in procuring or undergoing the experience
brings with it a secondary satisfaction or distaste.  Some men
and women, indeed, there are who can live on smiles and the word
"yes” forever.  But for others (indeed for most), this is too
tepid and relaxed a moral climate.  Passive happiness is slack
and insipid, and soon grows mawkish and intolerable.  Some
austerity and wintry negativity, some roughness, danger,
stringency, and effort, some “no! no!” must be mixed in, to
produce the sense of an existence with character and texture and
power.  The range of individual differences in this respect is
enormous; but whatever the mixture of yeses and noes may be, the
person is infallibly aware when he has struck it in the right
proportion FOR HIM.  This, he feels, is  my proper vocation, this
is the OPTIMUM, the law, the life for me to live.  Here I find
the degree of equilibrium, safety, calm, and leisure which I
need, or here I find the challenge, passion, fight, and hardship
without which my soul’s energy expires.
Every individual soul, in short, like every individual machine 
or organism, has its own best conditions of efficiency. A given
machine will run best under a certain steam-pressure, a certain
amperage; an organism under a certain diet, weight, or exercise. 
You seem to do best, I heard a doctor say to a patient, at about
140 millimeters of arterial tension.  And it is just so with our
sundry souls:  some are happiest in calm weather; some need the
sense of tension, of strong volition, to make them feel alive and
well.  For these latter souls, whatever is gained from day to day
must be paid for by sacrifice and inhibition, or else it comes
too cheap and has no zest.
Now when characters of this latter sort become religious, they
are apt to turn the edge of their need of effort and negativity
against their natural self; and the ascetic life gets evolved as
a consequence.
When Professor Tyndall in one of his lectures tells us that
Thomas Carlyle put him into his bath-tub every morning of a
freezing Berlin winter, he proclaimed one of the lowest grades of
asceticism.  Even without Carlyle, most of us find it necessary
to our soul’s health to start the day with a rather cool
immersion.  A little farther along the scale we get such
statements as this, from one of my correspondents, an agnostic:–
“Often at night in my warm bed I would feel ashamed to depend so
on the warmth, and whenever the thought would come over me I
would have to get up, no matter what time of night it was, and
stand for a minute in the cold, just so as to prove my manhood.”
Such cases as these belong simply to our head 1.  In the next
case we probably have a mixture of heads 2 and 3– the asceticism
becomes far more systematic and pronounced.  The writer is a
Protestant, whose sense of moral energy could doubtless be
gratified on no lower terms, and I take his case from Starbuck’s
manuscript collection.
“I practiced fasting and mortification of the flesh.  I secretly
made burlap shirts, and put the burrs next the skin, and wore
pebbles in my shoes.  I would spend nights flat on my back on the
floor without any covering.”
The Roman Church has organized and codified all this sort of
thing, and given it a market-value in the shape of “merit.”   
But we see the cultivation of hardship cropping out under every
sky and in every faith, as a spontaneous need of character.  Thus
we read of Channing, when first settled as a Unitarian minister,
that–
“He was now more simple than ever, and seemed to have become
incapable of any form of self-indulgence.  He took the smallest
room in the house for his study, though he might easily have
commanded one more light, airy, and in every way more suitable;
and chose for his sleeping chamber an attic which he shared with
a younger brother.  The furniture of the latter might have
answered for the cell of an anchorite, and consisted of a hard
mattress on a cot-bedstead, plain wooden chairs and table, with
matting on the floor.  It was without fire, and to cold he was
throughout life extremely sensitive; but he never complained or
appeared in any way to be conscious of inconvenience.  ’I
recollect,’ says his brother, ’after one most severe night, that
in the morning he sportively thus alluded to his suffering:  “If
my bed were my country, I should be somewhat like Bonaparte:  I
have no control except over the part which I occupy, the instant
I move, frost takes possession."’  In sickness only would he
change for the time his apartment and accept a few comforts. The
dress too that he habitually adopted was of most inferior
quality; and garments were constantly worn which the world would
call mean, though an almost feminine neatness preserved him from
the least appearance of neglect."[177]
[177] Memoirs of W. E. Channing, Boston, 1840, i. 196.
Channing’s asceticism, such as it was, was evidently a compound
of hardihood and love of purity.  The democracy which is an
offshoot of the enthusiasm of humanity, and of which I will speak
later under the head of the cult of poverty, doubtless bore also
a share.  Certainly there was no pessimistic element in his case.
In the next case we have a strongly pessimistic element, so that
it belongs under head 4.  John Cennick was Methodism’s first lay
preacher.  In 1735 he was convicted of sin, while walking in
Cheapside–
“And at once left off sing-singing, card-playing, and attending
theatres.  Sometimes he wished to go to a popish monastery, to
spend his life in devout retirement.  At other times he longed to
live in a cave, sleeping on fallen leaves, and feeding on forest
fruits.  He fasted long and often, and prayed nine times a day. .
. . Fancying dry bread too great an indulgence for so great a
sinner as himself, he began to feed on potatoes, acorns, crabs,
and grass; and often wished that he could live on roots and
herbs.  At length, in 1737, he found peace with God, and went on
his way rejoicing."[178]
[178] L. Tyerman:  The Life and Times of the Rev. John Wesley, i.
274.
In this poor man we have morbid melancholy and fear, and the
sacrifices made are to purge out sin, and to buy safety.  The
hopelessness of Christian theology in respect of the flesh and
the natural man generally has, in systematizing fear, made of it
one tremendous incentive to self-mortification.  It would be
quite unfair, however, in spite of the fact that this incentive
has often been worked in a mercenary way for hortatory purposes,
to call it a mercenary incentive.  The impulse to expiate and do
penance is, in its first intention, far too immediate and
spontaneous an expression of self-despair and anxiety to be
obnoxious to any such reproach.  In the form of loving sacrifice,
of spending all we have to show our devotion, ascetic discipline
of the severest sort may be the fruit of highly optimistic
religious feeling.
M. Vianney, the cure of Ars, was a French country priest, whose
holiness was exemplary.  We read in his life the following
account of his inner need of sacrifice:–
“’On this path,’ M. Vianney said, “it is only the first step
that costs.  There is in mortification a balm and a savor without
which one cannot live when once one has made their acquaintance.
There is but one way in which to give one’s self to God– that
is, to give one’s self entirely, and to keep nothing for one’s
self.  The little that one keeps is only good to trouble one and
make one suffer.’  Accordingly he imposed it on himself that he
should never smell a flower, never drink when parched with
thirst, never drive away a fly, never show disgust before a
repugnant object, never complain of anything that had to do with
his personal comfort, never sit down, never lean upon his elbows
when he was kneeling.  The Cure of Ars was very sensitive to
cold, but he would never take means to protect himself against
it.  During a very severe winter, one of his missionaries
contrived a false floor to his confessional and placed a metal
case of hot water beneath.  The trick succeeded, and the Saint
was deceived:  ’God is very good,’ he said with emotion.  ’This
year, through all the cold, my feet have always been warm.’
"[179]
[179] A. Mounin:  Le Cure d’Ars, vie de M. J. B. M. Vianney,
1864, p. 545, abridged.
In this case the spontaneous impulse to make sacrifices for the
pure love of God was probably the uppermost conscious motive.  We
may class it, then, under our head 3.  Some authors think that
the impulse to sacrifice is the main religious phenomenon.  It is
a prominent, a universal phenomenon certainly, and lies deeper
than any special creed.  Here, for instance, is what seems to be
a spontaneous example of it, simply expressing what seemed right
at the time between the individual and his Maker.  Cotton Mather,
the New England Puritan divine, is generally reputed a rather
grotesque pedant; yet what is more touchingly simple than his
relation of what happened when his wife came to die?
“When I saw to what a point of resignation I was now called of
the Lord,” he says, “I resolved, with his help, therein to
glorify him.  So, two hours before my lovely consort expired, I
kneeled by her bedside, and I took into my two hands a dear hand,
the dearest in the world.  With her thus in my hands, I solemnly
and sincerely gave her up unto the Lord:  and in token of my real
RESIGNATION, I gently put her out of my hands, and laid away a
most lovely hand, resolving that I would never touch it more. 
This was the hardest, and perhaps the bravest action that ever I
did.  She . . . told me that she signed and sealed my act of
resignation.  And though before that she called for me
continually, she after this never asked for me any more."[180]
[180] B. Wendell:  Cotton Mather, New York, no date, p. 198.
Father Vianney’s asceticism taken in its totality was simply the
result of a permanent flood of high spiritual enthusiasm, longing
to make proof of itself.  The Roman Church has, in its
incomparable fashion, collected all the motives towards
asceticism together, and so codified them that any one wishing to
pursue Christian perfection may find a practical system mapped
out for him in any one of a number of ready-made manuals.[181]
The dominant Church notion of perfection is of course the
negative one of avoidance of sin.  Sin proceeds from
concupiscence, and concupiscence from our carnal passions and
temptations, chief of which are pride, sensuality in all its
forms, and the loves of worldly excitement and possession.  All
these sources of sin must be resisted; and discipline and
austerities are a most efficacious mode of meeting them.  Hence
there are always in these books chapters on self-mortification. 
But whenever a procedure is codified, the more delicate spirit of
it evaporates, and if we wish the undiluted ascetic spirit–the
passion of self-contempt wreaking itself on the poor flesh, the
divine irrationality of devotion making a sacrificial gift of all
it has (its sensibilities, namely) to the object of its
adoration–we must go to autobiographies, or other individual
documents.
[181] That of the earlier Jesuit, Rodriguez, which has been
translated into all languages, is one of the best known.  A
convenient modern manual, very well put together, is L’Ascetique
Chretienne, by M. J. Ribet, Paris, Poussielgue, nouvelle edition,
1898.
Saint John of the Cross, a Spanish mystic who flourished–or
rather who existed, for there was little that suggested
flourishing about him–in the sixteenth century, will supply a
passage suitable for our purpose.
“First of all, carefully excite in yourself an habitual
affectionate will in all things to imitate Jesus Christ.  If
anything agreeable offers itself to your senses, yet does not at
the same time tend purely to the honor and glory of God, renounce
it and separate yourself from it for the love of Christ, who all
his life long had no other taste or wish than to do the will of
his Father whom he called his meat and nourishment.  For example,
you take satisfaction in HEARING of things in which the glory of
God bears no part.  Deny yourself this satisfaction, mortify your
wish to listen.  You take pleasure in SEEING objects which do not
raise your mind to God:  refuse yourself this pleasure, and turn
away your eyes.  The same with conversations and all other
things. Act similarly, so far as you are able, with all the
operations of the senses, striving to make yourself free from
their yokes.
“The radical remedy lies in the mortification of the four great
natural passions, joy, hope, fear, and grief.  You must seek to
deprive these of every satisfaction and leave them as it were in
darkness and the void.  Let your soul therefore turn always:
“Not to what is most easy, but to what is hardest;
“Not to what tastes best, but to what is most distasteful;
“Not to what most pleases, but to what disgusts;
“Not to matter of consolation, but to matter for desolation
rather;
“Not to rest, but to labor;
“Not to desire the more, but the less;
“Not to aspire to what is highest and most precious, but to what
is lowest and most contemptible;
“Not to will anything, but to will nothing;
“Not to seek the best in everything, but to seek the worst, so 
that you may enter for the love of Christ into a complete
destitution, a perfect poverty of spirit, and an absolute
renunciation of everything in this world.
“Embrace these practices with all the energy of your soul and you
will find in a short time great delights and unspeakable
consolations.
“Despise yourself, and wish that others should despise you;
“Speak to your own disadvantage, and desire others to do the
same;
“Conceive a low opinion of yourself, and find it good when others
hold the same;
“To enjoy the taste of all things, have no taste for anything.
“To know all things, learn to know nothing.
“To possess all things, resolve to possess nothing.
“To be all things, be willing to be nothing.
“To get to where you have no taste for anything, go through
whatever experiences you have no taste for.
“To learn to know nothing, go whither you are ignorant.
“To reach what you possess not, go whithersoever you own nothing.
“To be what you are not, experience what you are not.”
These later verses play with that vertigo of self-contradiction
which is so dear to mysticism.  Those that come next are
completely mystical, for in them Saint John passes from God to
the more metaphysical notion of the All.
“When you stop at one thing, you cease to open yourself to the
All.
“For to come to the All you must give up the All.
“And if you should attain to owning the All, you must own it,
desiring Nothing.
“In this spoliation, the soul finds its tranquillity and rest.
Profoundly established in the centre of its own nothingness, it
can be assailed by naught that comes from below; and since it no
longer desires anything, what comes from above cannot depress it;
for its desires alone are the causes of its woes."[182]
[182] Saint Jean de la Croix, vie et Oeuvres, Paris, 1893, ii.
94, 99, abridged.
And now, as a more concrete example of heads 4 and 5, in fact of
all our heads together, and of the irrational extreme to which a
psychopathic individual may go in the line of bodily austerity, I
will quote the sincere Suso’s account of his own self-tortures. 
Suso, you will remember, was one of the fourteenth century German
mystics; his autobiography, written in the third person, is a
classic religious document.
“He was in his youth of a temperament full of fire and life; and
when this began to make itself felt, it was very grievous to him;
and he sought by many devices how he might bring his body into
subjection.  He wore for a long time a hair shirt and an iron
chain, until the blood ran from him, so that he was obliged to
leave them off.  He secretly caused an undergarment to be made
for him; and in the undergarment he had strips of leather fixed,
into which a hundred and fifty brass nails, pointed and filed
sharp, were driven, and the points of the nails were always
turned towards the flesh.  He had this garment made very tight,
and so arranged as to go round him and fasten in front in order
that it might fit the closer to his body, and the pointed nails
might be driven into his flesh; and it was high enough to reach
upwards to his navel.  In this he used to sleep at night. Now in
summer, when it was hot, and he was very tired and ill from his
journeyings, or when he held the office of lecturer, he would
sometimes, as he lay thus in bonds, and oppressed with toil, and
tormented also by noxious insects, cry aloud and give way to
fretfulness, and twist round and round in agony, as a worm does
when run through with a pointed needle.  It often seemed to him
as if he were lying upon an ant-hill, from the torture caused by
the insects; for if he wished to sleep, or when he had fallen
asleep, they vied with one another.[183] Sometimes he cried to
Almighty God in the fullness of his heart:  Alas! Gentle God,
what a dying is this!  When a man is killed by murderers or
strong beasts of prey it is soon over; but I lie dying here under
the cruel insects, and yet cannot die.  The nights in winter were
never so long, nor was the summer so hot, as to make him leave
off this exercise.  On the contrary, he devised something farther
–two leathern loops into which he put his hands, and fastened
one on each side his throat, and made the fastenings so secure
that even if his cell had been on fire about him, he could not
have helped himself.  This he continued until his hands and arms
had become almost tremulous with the strain, and then he devised
something else:  two leather gloves; and he caused a brazier to
fit them all over with sharp-pointed brass tacks, and he used to
put them on at night, in order that if he should try while asleep
to throw off the hair undergarment, or relieve himself from the
gnawings of the vile insects, the tacks might then stick into his
body.  And so it came to pass.  If ever he sought to help himself
with his hands in his sleep, he drove the sharp tacks into his
breast, and tore himself, so that his flesh festered. When after
many weeks the wounds had healed, he tore himself again and made
fresh wounds.
[183] “Insects,” i.e. lice, were an unfailing token of mediaeval
sainthood. We read of Francis of Assisi’s sheepskin that “often a
companion of the saint would take it to the fire to clean and
dispediculate it, doing so, as he said, because the seraphic
father himself was no enemy of pedocchi, but on the contrary kept
them on him (le portava adosso) and held it for an honor and a
glory to wear these celestial pearls in his habit.  Quoted by P.
Sabatier:  Speculum Perfectionis, etc., Paris, 1898, p. 231,
note.
“He continued this tormenting exercise for about sixteen years. 
At the end of this time, when his blood was now chilled, and the
fire of his temperament destroyed, there appeared to him in a
vision on Whitsunday, a messenger from heaven, who told him that
God required this of him no longer.  Whereupon he discontinued
it, and threw all these things away into a running stream.”
Suso then tells how, to emulate the sorrows of his crucified
Lord, he made himself a cross with thirty protruding iron needles
and nails.  This he bore on his bare back between his shoulders
day and night.  “The first time that he stretched out this cross
upon his back his tender frame was struck with terror at it, and
blunted the sharp nails slightly against a stone.  But soon,
repenting of this womanly cowardice, he pointed them all again
with a file, and placed once more the cross upon him.  It made
his back, where the bones are, bloody and seared.  Whenever he
sat down or stood up, it was as if a hedgehog-skin were on him. 
If any one touched him unawares, or pushed against his clothes,
it tore him.”
Suso next tells of his penitences by means of striking this cross
and forcing the nails deeper into the flesh, and likewise of his
self-scourgings–a dreadful story–and then goes on as follows: 
"At this same period the Servitor procured an old castaway door,
and he used to lie upon it at night without any bedclothes to
make him comfortable, except that he took off his shoes and
wrapped a thick cloak round him.  He thus secured for himself a
most miserable bed; for hard pea-stalks lay in humps under his
head, the cross with the sharp nails stuck into his back, his
arms were locked fast in bonds, the horsehair undergarment was
round his loins, and the cloak too was heavy and the door hard.
Thus he lay in wretchedness, afraid to stir, just like a log, and
he would send up many a sigh to God.
“In winter he suffered very much from the frost.  If he stretched
out his feet they lay bare on the floor and froze, if he gathered
them up the blood became all on fire in his legs, and this was
great pain.  His feet were full of sores, his legs dropsical, his
knees bloody and seared, his loins covered with scars from the
horsehair, his body wasted, his mouth parched with intense
thirst, and his hands tremulous from weakness.  Amid these
torments he spent his nights and days; and he endured them all
out of the greatness of the love which he bore in his heart to
the Divine and Eternal Wisdom, our Lord Jesus Christ, whose
agonizing sufferings he sought to imitate.  After a time he gave
up this penitential exercise of the door, and instead of it he
took up his abode in a very small cell, and used the bench, which
was so narrow and short that he could not stretch himself upon
it, as his bed.  In this hole, or upon the door, he lay at night
in his usual bonds, for about eight years.  It was also his
custom, during the space of twenty-five years, provided he was
staying in the convent, never to go after compline in winter into
any warm room, or to the convent stove to warm himself, no matter
how cold it might be, unless he was obliged to do so for other
reasons.  Throughout all these years he never took a bath, either
a water or a sweating bath; and this he did in order to mortify
his comfort-seeking body.  He practiced during a long time such
rigid poverty that he would neither receive nor touch a penny,
either with leave or without it.  For a considerable time he
strove to attain such a high degree of purity that he would
neither scratch nor touch any part of his body, save only his
hands and feet."[184]
[184] The Life of the Blessed Henry Suso, by Himself, translated
by T. F. Knox, London, 1865, pp. 56-80, abridged.
I spare you the recital of poor Suso’s self-inflicted tortures
from thirst.  It is pleasant to know that after his fortieth
year, God showed him by a series of visions that he had
sufficiently broken down the natural man, and that he might leave
these exercises off.  His case is distinctly pathological, but he
does not seem to have had the alleviation, which some ascetics
have enjoyed, of an alteration of sensibility capable of actually
turning torment into a perverse kind of pleasure.  Of the founder
of the Sacred Heart order, for example, we read that
“Her love of pain and suffering was insatiable. . . .  She said
that she could cheerfully live till the day of judgment, provided
she might always have matter for suffering for God; but that to
live a single day without suffering would be intolerable. She
said again that she was devoured with two unassuageable fevers,
one for the holy communion, the other for suffering, humiliation,
and annihilation.  ’Nothing but pain,’ she continually said in
her letters, ’makes my life supportable.’"[185]
[185] Bougaud:  Hist de la bienheureuse Marguerite Marie, Paris,
1894, pp. 265, 171.  Compare, also, pp. 386, 387.
So much for the phenomena to which the ascetic impulse will in
certain persons give rise.  In the ecclesiastically consecrated
character three minor branches of self-mortification have been
recognized as indispensable pathways to perfection. I refer to
the chastity, obedience, and poverty which the monk vows to
observe; and upon the heads of obedience and poverty I will make
a few remarks.
First, of Obedience.  The secular life of our twentieth century
opens with this virtue held in no high esteem.  The duty of the
individual to determine his own conduct and profit or suffer by
the consequences seems, on the contrary, to be one of our best
rooted contemporary Protestant social ideals. So much so that it
is difficult even imaginatively to comprehend how men possessed
of an inner life of their own could ever have come to think the
subjection of its will to that of other finite creatures
recommendable.  I confess that to myself it seems something of a
mystery.  Yet it evidently corresponds to a profound interior
need of many persons, and we must do our best to understand it.
On the lowest possible plane, one sees how the expediency of
obedience in a firm ecclesiastical organization must have led to
its being viewed as meritorious.  Next, experience shows that
there are times in every one’s life when one can be better
counseled by others than by one’s self.  Inability to decide is
one of the commonest symptoms of fatigued nerves; friends who see
our troubles more broadly, often see them more wisely than we do;
so it is frequently an act of excellent virtue to consult and
obey a doctor, a partner, or a wife.  But, leaving these lower
prudential regions, we find, in the nature of some of the
spiritual excitements which we have been studying, good reasons
for idealizing obedience. Obedience may spring from the general
religious phenomenon of inner softening and self-surrender and
throwing one’s self on higher powers.  So saving are these
attitudes felt to be that in themselves, apart from utility, they
become ideally consecrated; and in obeying a man whose
fallibility we see through thoroughly, we, nevertheless, may feel
much as we do when we resign our will to that of infinite wisdom.
Add self-despair and the passion of self-crucifixion to this, and
obedience becomes an ascetic sacrifice, agreeable quite
irrespective of whatever prudential uses it might have.
It is as a sacrifice, a mode of “mortification,” that obedience
is primarily conceived by Catholic writers, a “sacrifice which
man offers to God, and of which he is himself both the priest and
the victim.  By poverty he immolates his exterior possessions; by
chastity he immolates his body; by obedience he completes the
sacrifice, and gives to God all that he yet holds as his own, his
two most precious goods, his intellect and his will.  The
sacrifice is then complete and unreserved, a genuine holocaust,
for the entire victim is now consumed for the honor of God."[186]
Accordingly, in Catholic discipline, we obey our superior not as
mere man, but as the representative of Christ.  Obeying God in
him by our intention, obedience is easy.  But when the text-book
theologians marshal collectively all their reasons for
recommending it, the mixture sounds to our ears rather odd.
[186] Lejuene:  Introduction a la Vie Mystique, 1899, p. 277. 
The holocaust simile goes back at least as far as Ignatius
Loyola.
“One of the great consolations of the monastic life,” says a
Jesuit authority, “is the assurance we have that in obeying we
can commit no fault.  The Superior may commit a fault in
commanding you to do this thing or that, but you are certain that
you commit no fault so long as you obey, because God will only
ask you if you have duly performed what orders you received, and
if you can furnish a clear account in that respect, you are
absolved entirely.  Whether the things you did were opportune, or
whether there were not something better that might have been
done, these are questions not asked of you, but rather of your
Superior.  The moment what you did was done obediently, God wipes
it out of your account, and charges it to the Superior. So that
Saint Jerome well exclaimed, in celebrating the advantages of
obedience, ’Oh, sovereign liberty! Oh, holy and blessed security
by which one become almost impeccable!’
“Saint John Climachus is of the same sentiment when he calls
obedience an excuse before God.  In fact, when God asks why you
have done this or that, and you reply, it is because I was so
ordered by my Superiors, God will ask for no other excuse.  As a
passenger in a good vessel with a good pilot need give himself 
no farther concern, but may go to sleep in peace, because the
pilot has charge over all, and ’watches for him’; so a religious
person who lives under the yoke of obedience goes to heaven as if
while sleeping, that is, while leaning entirely on the conduct of
his Superiors, who are the pilots of his vessel, and keep watch
for him continually.  It is no small thing, of a truth, to be
able to cross the stormy sea of life on the shoulders and in the
arms of another, yet that is just the grace which God accords to
those who live under the yoke of obedience.  Their Superior bears
all their burdens. . . . A certain grave doctor said that he
would rather spend his life in picking up straws by obedience,
than by his own responsible choice busy himself with the loftiest
works of charity, because one is certain of following the will of
God in whatever one may do from obedience, but never certain in
the same degree of anything which we may do of our own proper
movement."[187]
[187] Alfonso Rodriguez, S. J.:  Pratique de la Perfection
Chretienne, Part iii., Treatise v., ch. x.
One should read the letters in which Ignatius Loyola recommends
obedience as the backbone of his order, if one would gain insight
into the full spirit of its cult.[188] They are too long to
quote; but Ignatius’s belief is so vividly expressed in a couple
of sayings reported by companions that, though they have been so
often cited, I will ask your permission to copy them once more:–
[188] Letters li. and cxx.  of the collection translated into
French by Bouix, Paris, 1870.
“I ought,” an early biographer reports him as saying, “on
entering religion, and thereafter, to place myself entirely in
the hands of God, and of him who takes His place by His
authority. I ought to desire that my Superior should oblige me to
give up my own judgment, and conquer my own mind.  I ought to set
up no difference between one Superior and another, . . . but
recognize them all as equal before God, whose place they fill.
For if I distinguish persons, I weaken the spirit of obedience.
In the hands of my Superior, I must be a soft wax, a thing, from
which he is to require whatever pleases him, be it to write or
receive letters, to speak or not to speak to such a person, or
the like; and I must put all my fervor in executing zealously and
exactly what I am ordered.  I must consider myself as a corpse
which has neither intelligence nor will; be like a mass of matter
which without resistance lets itself be placed wherever it may
please any one; like a stick in the hand of an old man, who uses
it according to his needs and places it where it suits him.  So
must I be under the hands of the Order, to serve it in the way it
judges most useful.
“I must never ask of the Superior to be sent to a particular
place, to be employed in a particular duty. . . . I must
consider nothing as belonging to me personally, and as regards
the things I use, be like a statue which lets itself be stripped
and never opposes resistance."[189]
[189] Bartoli-Michel, ii. 13
The other saying is reported by Rodriguez in the chapter from
which I a moment ago made quotations.  When speaking of the
Pope’s authority, Rodriguez writes:–
“Saint Ignatius said, when general of his company, that if the
Holy Father were to order him to set sail in the first bark which
he might find in the port of Ostia, near Rome, and to abandon
himself to the sea, without a mast, without sails, without oars
or rudder or any of the things that are needful for navigation or
subsistence, he would obey not only with alacrity, but without
anxiety or repugnance, and even with a great internal
satisfaction."[190]
[190] Rodriguez:  Op. cit., Part iii., Treatise v., ch. vi.
With a solitary concrete example of the extravagance to which the
virtue we are considering has been carried, I will pass to the
topic next in order.
“Sister Marie Claire [of Port Royal] had been greatly imbued with
the holiness and excellence of M.  de Langres.  This prelate,
soon after he came to Port Royal, said to her one day, seeing her
so tenderly attached to Mother Angelique, that it would perhaps
be better not to speak to her again.  Marie Claire, greedy of
obedience, took this inconsiderate word for an oracle of God, and
from that day forward remained for several years without once
speaking to her sister."[191]
[191] Sainte-Beuve:  Histoire de Port Royal, i. 346.
Our next topic shall be Poverty, felt at all times and under all
creeds as one adornment of a saintly life.  Since the instinct of
ownership is fundamental in man’s nature, this is one more
example of the ascetic paradox.  Yet it appears no paradox at
all, but perfectly reasonable, the moment one recollects how
easily higher excitements hold lower cupidities in check.  Having
just quoted the Jesuit Rodriguez on the subject of obedience, I
will, to give immediately a concrete turn to our discussion of
poverty, also read you a page from his chapter on this latter
virtue.  You must remember that he is writing instructions for
monks of his own order, and bases them all on the text, “Blessed
are the poor in spirit.”
“If any one of you,” he says, “will know whether or not he is
really poor in spirit, let him consider whether he loves the
ordinary consequences and effects of poverty, which are hunger,
thirst, cold, fatigue, and the denudation of all conveniences.
See if you are glad to wear a worn-out habit full of patches. 
See if you are glad when something is lacking to your meal, when
you are passed by in serving it, when what you receive is
distasteful to you, when your cell is out of repair.  If you are
not glad of these things, if instead of loving them you avoid
them, then there is proof that you have not attained the
perfection of poverty of spirit.”  Rodriguez then goes on to
describe the practice of poverty in more detail.  “The first
point is that which Saint Ignatius proposes in his constitutions,
when he says, ’Let no one use anything as if it were his private
possession.’ ’A religious person,’ he says, ’ought in respect to
all the things that he uses, to be like a statue which one may
drape with clothing, but which feels no grief and makes no
resistance when one strips it again.  It is in this way that you
should feel towards your clothes, your books, your cell, and
everything else that you make use of; if ordered to quit them, or
to exchange them for others, have no more sorrow than if you were
a statue being uncovered. In this way you will avoid using them
as if they were your private possession.  But if, when you give
up your cell, or yield possession of this or that object or
exchange it for another, you feel repugnance and are not like a
statue, that shows that you view these things as if they were
your private property.’
“And this is why our holy founder wished the superiors to test
their monks somewhat as God tested Abraham, and to put their
poverty and their obedience to trial, that by this means they may
become acquainted with the degree of their virtue, and gain a
chance to make ever farther progress in perfection, . . . making
the one move out of his room when he finds it comfortable and is
attached to it; taking away from another a book of which he is
fond; or obliging a third to exchange his garment for a worse
one.  Otherwise we should end by acquiring a species of property
in all these several objects, and little by little the wall of
poverty that surrounds us and constitutes our principal defense
would be thrown down.  The ancient fathers of the desert used
often thus to treat their companions. . . . Saint Dositheus,
being sick-nurse, desired a certain knife, and asked Saint
Dorotheus for it, not for his private use, but for employment in
the infirmary of which he had charge. Whereupon Saint Dorotheus
answered him:  ’Ha! Dositheus, so that knife pleases you so much!
Will you be the slave of a knife or the slave of Jesus Christ! Do
you not blush with shame at wishing that a knife should be your
master?  I will not let you touch it.’ Which reproach and refusal
had such an effect upon the holy disciple that since that time he
never touched the knife again.’ .  .  .
“Therefore, in our rooms,” Father Rodriguez continues, “there
must be no other furniture than a bed, a table, a bench, and a
candlestick, things purely necessary, and nothing more.  It is
not allowed among us that our cells should be ornamented with
pictures or aught else, neither armchairs, carpets, curtains, nor
any sort of cabinet or bureau of any elegance.  Neither is it
allowed us to keep anything to eat, either for ourselves or for 
those who may come to visit us.  We must ask permission to go to
the refectory even for a glass of water; and finally we may not
keep a book in which we can write a line, or which we may take
away with us.  One cannot deny that thus we are in great poverty.
But this poverty is at the same time a great repose and a great
perfection.  For it would be inevitable, in case a religious
person were allowed to own supernuous possessions, that these
things would greatly occupy his mind, be it to acquire them, to
preserve them, or to increase them; so that in not permitting us
at all to own them, all these inconveniences are remedied. Among
the various good reasons why the company forbids secular persons
to enter our cells, the principal one is that thus we may the
easier be kept in poverty.  After all, we are all men, and if we
were to receive people of the world into our rooms, we should not
have the strength to remain within the bounds prescribed, but
should at least wish to adorn them with some books to give the
visitors a better opinion of our scholarship."[192]
[192] Rodriguez:  Op. cit., Part iii, Treatise iii., chaps. vi.,
vii.
Since Hindu fakirs, Buddhist monks, and Mohammedan dervishes
unite with Jesuits and Franciscans in idealizing poverty as the
loftiest individual state, it is worth while to examine into the
spiritual grounds for such a seemingly unnatural opinion.  And
first, of those which lie closest to common human nature.
The opposition between the men who HAVE and the men who ARE is
immemorial.  Though the gentleman, in the old- fashioned sense of
the man who is well born, has usually in point of fact been
predaceous and reveled in lands and goods, yet he has never
identified his essence with these possessions, but rather with
the personal superiorities, the courage, generosity, and pride
supposed to be his birthright.  To certain huckstering kinds of
consideration he thanked God he was forever inaccessible, and if
in life’s vicissitudes he should become destitute through their
lack, he was glad to think that with his sheer valor he was all
the freer to work out his salvation.  “Wer nur selbst was hatte,"
says Lessing’s Tempelherr, in Nathan the Wise, “mein Gott, mein
Gott, ich habe nichts!”  This ideal of the well-born man without
possessions was embodied in knight-errantry and templardom; and,
hideously corrupted as it has always been, it still dominates
sentimentally, if not practically, the military and aristocratic
view of life.  We glorify the soldier as the man absolutely
unincumbered.  Owning nothing but his bare life, and willing to
toss that up at any moment when the cause commands him, he is the
representative of unhampered freedom in ideal directions.  The
laborer who pays with his person day by day, and has no rights
invested in the future, offers also much of this ideal
detachment.  Like the savage, he may make his bed wherever his
right arm can support him, and from his simple and athletic
attitude of observation, the property-owner seems buried and
smothered in ignoble externalities and trammels, “wading in straw
and rubbish to his knees.”  The claims which THINGS make are
corrupters of manhood, mortgages on the soul, and a drag anchor
on our progress towards the empyrean.
“Everything I meet with,” writes Whitefield, “seems to carry this
voice with it–’Go thou and preach the Gospel; be a pilgrim on
earth; have no party or certain dwelling place.’ My heart echoes
back, ’Lord Jesus, help me to do or suffer thy will. When thou
seest me in danger of NESTLING–in pity–in tender pity–put a
THORN in my nest to prevent me from it.’"[193]
[193] R. Philip:  The Life and Times of George Whitefield,
London, 1842, p. 366.
The loathing of “capital” with which our laboring classes today
are growing more and more infected seems largely composed of this
sound sentiment of antipathy for lives based on mere having.  As
an anarchist poet writes:–
“Not by accumulating riches, but by giving away that which you
have,
“Shall you become beautiful;
“You must undo the wrappings, not case yourself in fresh ones;
“Not by multiplying clothes shall you make your body sound and
healthy, but rather by discarding them .  .  .
“For a soldier who is going on a campaign does not seek what
fresh furniture he can carry on his back, but rather what he can
leave behind;
“Knowing well that every additional thing which he cannot freely
use and handle is an impediment."[194]
[194] Edward Carpenter:  Towards Democracy, p. 362, abridged.
In short, lives based on having are less free than lives based
either on doing or on being, and in the interest of action people
subject to spiritual excitement throw away possessions as so many
clogs.  Only those who have no private interests can follow an
ideal straight away.  Sloth and cowardice creep in with every
dollar or guinea we have to guard.  When a brother novice came to
Saint Francis, saying:  “Father, it would be a great consolation
to me to own a psalter, but even supposing that our general
should concede to me this indulgence, still I should like also to
have your consent,” Francis put him off with the examples of
Charlemagne, Roland, and Oliver, pursuing the infidels in sweat
and labor, and finally dying on the field of battle.  “So care
not,” he said, “for owning books and knowledge, but care rather
for works of goodness.”  And when some weeks later the novice
came again to talk of his craving for the psalter, Francis said: 
"After you have got your psalter you will crave a breviary; and
after you have got your breviary you will sit in your stall like
a grand prelate, and will say to your brother:  “Hand me my
breviary.”.  .  . And thenceforward he denied all such requests,
saying:  A man possesses of learning only so much as comes out of
him in action, and a monk is a good preacher only so far as his
deeds proclaim him such, for every tree is known by its
fruits."[195]
[195] Speculum Perfectionis, ed.  P. Sabatier, Paris, 1898, pp.
10, 13.
But beyond this more worthily athletic attitude involved in doing
and being, there is, in the desire of not having, something
profounder still, something related to that fundamental mystery
of religious experience, the satisfaction found in absolute
surrender to the larger power.  So long as any secular safeguard
is retained, so long as any residual prudential guarantee is
clung to, so long the surrender is incomplete, the vital crisis
is not passed, fear still stands sentinel, and mistrust of the
divine obtains:  we hold by two anchors, looking to God, it is
true, after a fashion, but also holding by our proper
machinations.  In certain medical experiences we have the same
critical point to overcome.  A drunkard, or a morphine or cocaine
maniac, offers himself to be cured.  He appeals to the doctor to
wean him from his enemy, but he dares not face blank abstinence. 
The tyrannical drug is still an anchor to windward:  he hides
supplies of it among his clothing; arranges secretly to have it
smuggled in in case of need.  Even so an incompletely regenerate
man still trusts in his own expedients.  His money is like the
sleeping potion which the chronically wakeful patient keeps
beside his bed; he throws himself on God, but IF he should need
the other help, there it will be also.  Every one knows cases of
this incomplete and ineffective desire for reform-drunkards whom,
with all their self-reproaches and resolves, one perceives to be
quite unwilling seriously to contemplate NEVER being drunk again!
Really to give up anything on which we have relied, to give it up
definitely, “for good and all” and forever, signifies one of
those radical alterations of character which came under our
notice in the lectures on conversion. In it the inner man rolls
over into an entirely different position of equilibrium, lives in
a new centre of energy from this time on, and the turning-point
and hinge of all such operations seems usually to involve the
sincere acceptance of certain nakednesses and destitutions.
Accordingly, throughout the annals of the saintly life, we find
this ever-recurring note:  Fling yourself upon God’s providence
without making any reserve whatever–take no thought for the
morrow–sell all you have and give it to the poor–only when the
sacrifice is ruthless and reckless will the higher safety really
arrive.  As a concrete example let me read a page from the
biography of Antoinette Bourignon, a good woman, much persecuted
in her day by both Protestants and Catholics, because she would
not take her religion at second hand.  When a young girl, in her
father’s house–
“She spent whole nights in prayer, oft repeating:  Lord, what
wilt thou have me to do?  And being one night in a most profound
penitence, she said from the bottom of her heart:  ’O my Lord!
What must I do to please thee?  For I have nobody to teach me. 
Speak to my soul and it will hear thee.’ At that instant she
heard, as if another had spoke within her:  Forsake all earthly
things.  Separate thyself from the love of the creatures. Deny
thyself.  She was quite astonished, not understanding this
language, and mused long on these three points, thinking how she
could fulfill them.  She thought she could not live without
earthly things, nor without loving the creatures, nor without
loving herself.  Yet she said, ’By thy Grace I will do it, Lord!’
But when she would perform her promise, she knew not where to
begin.  Having thought on the religious in monasteries, that they
forsook all earthly things by being shut up in a cloister, and
the love of themselves by subjecting of their wills, she asked
leave of her father to enter into a cloister of the barefoot
Carmelites, but he would not permit it, saying he would rather
see her laid in her grave.  This seemed to her a great cruelty,
for she thought to find in the cloister the true Christians she
had been seeking, but she found afterwards that he knew the
cloisters better than she, for after he had forbidden her, and
told her he would never permit her to be a religious, nor give
her any money to enter there, yet she went to Father Laurens, the
Director, and offered to serve in the monastery and work hard for
her bread, and be content with little, if he would receive her.
At which he smiled and said:  That cannot be.  We must have money
to build; we take no maids without money; you must find the way
to get it, else there is no entry here.
“This astonished her greatly, and she was thereby undeceived as
to the cloisters, resolving to forsake all company and live alone
till it should please God to show her what she ought to do and
whither to go.  She asked always earnestly, ’When shall I be
perfectly thine, O my God?’ And she thought he still answered
her, When thou shalt no longer possess anything, and shalt die to
thyself.  ’And where shall I do that, Lord?’ He answered her, In
the desert.  This made so strong an impression on her soul that
she aspired after this; but being a maid of eighteen years only,
she was afraid of unlucky chances, and was never used to travel,
and knew no way.  She laid aside all these doubts and said,
’Lord, thou wilt guide me how and where it shall please thee.  It
is for thee that I do it.  I will lay aside my habit of a maid,
and will take that of a hermit that I may pass unknown.’ Having
then secretly made ready this habit, while her parents thought to
have married her, her father having promised her to a rich French
merchant, she prevented the time, and on Easter evening, having
cut her hair, put on the habit, and slept a little, she went out
of her chamber about four in the morning, taking nothing but one
penny to buy bread for that day.  And it being said to her in
going out, Where is thy faith?  in a penny?  she threw it away,
begging pardon of God for her fault, and saying, ’No, Lord, my
faith is not in a penny, but in thee alone.’  Thus she went away
wholly delivered from the heavy burthen of the cares and good
things of this world, and found her soul so satisfied that she no
longer wished for anything upon earth, resting entirely upon God,
with this only fear lest she should be discovered and be obliged
to return home; for she felt already more content in this poverty
than she had done for all her life in all the delights of the
world."[196]
[196] An Apology for M. Antonia Bourignon, London, 1699, pp. 269,
270, abridged.
Another example from Starbuck’s MS. collection:–
“At a meeting held at six the next morning, I heard a man relate
his experience.  He said:  The Lord asked him if he would
confess Christ among the quarrymen with whom he worked, and he
said he would.  Then he asked him if he would give up to be used
of the Lord the four hundred dollars he had laid up, and he said
he would and thus the Lord saved him.  The thought came to me at
once that I had never made a real consecration either of myself
or of my property to the Lord, but had always tried to serve the
Lord in my way.  Now the Lord asked me if I would serve him in
HIS way, and go out alone and penniless if he so ordered.  The
question was pressed home, and I must decide:  To forsake all and
have him, or have all and lose him!  I soon decided to take him;
and the blessed assurance came, that he had taken me for his own,
and my joy was full.  I returned home from the meeting with
feelings as simple as a child.  I thought all would be glad to
hear of the joy of the Lord that possessed me, and so I began to
tell the simple story.  But to my great surprise, the pastors
(for I attended meetings in three churches) opposed the
experience and said it was fanaticism, and one told the members
of his church to shun those that professed it, and I soon found
that my foes were those of my own household.”
The penny was a small financial safeguard, but an effective
spiritual obstacle.  Not till it was thrown away could the
character settle into the new equilibrium completely.
Over and above the mystery of self-surrender, there are in the
cult of poverty other religious mysteries.  There is the mystery
of veracity:  “Naked came I into the world,” etc.– whoever first
said that, possessed this mystery.  My own bare entity must fight
the battle–shams cannot save me.  There is also the mystery of
democracy, or sentiment of the equality before God of all his
creatures.  This sentiment (which seems in general to have been
more widespread in Mohammedan than in Christian lands) tends to
nullify man’s usual acquisitiveness.  Those who have it spurn
dignities and honors, privileges and advantages, preferring, as I
said in a former lecture, to grovel on the common level before
the face of God.  It is not exactly the sentiment of humility,
though it comes so close to it in practice.  It is HUMANITY,
rather, refusing to enjoy anything that others do not share. A
profound moralist, writing of Christ’s saying, “Sell all thou
hast and follow me,” proceeds as follows:–
“Christ may have meant:  If you love mankind absolutely you will
as a result not care for any possessions whatever, and this seems
a very likely proposition.  But it is one thing to believe that a
proposition is probably true; it is another thing to see it as a
fact.  If you loved mankind as Christ loved them, you would see
his conclusion as a fact.  It would be obvious.  You would sell
your goods, and they would be no loss to you.  These truths,
while literal to Christ, and to any mind that has Christ’s love
for mankind, become parables to lesser natures.  There are in
every generation people who, beginning innocently, with no
predetermined intention of becoming saints, find themselves drawn
into the vortex by their interest in helping mankind, and by the
understanding that comes from actually doing it.  The abandonment
of their old mode of life is like dust in the balance.  It is
done gradually, incidentally, imperceptibly.  Thus the whole
question of the abandonment of luxury is no question at all, but
a mere incident to another question, namely, the degree to which
we abandon ourselves to the remorseless logic of our love for
others."[197]
[197] J. J. Chapman, in the Political Nursery, vol. iv. p. 4,
April, 1900, abridged.
But in all these matters of sentiment one must have “been there"
one’s self in order to understand them.  No American can ever
attain to understanding the loyalty of a Briton towards his king,
of a German towards his emperor; nor can a Briton or German ever
understand the peace of heart of an American in having no king,
no Kaiser, no spurious nonsense, between him and the common God
of all.  If sentiments as simple as these are mysteries which one
must receive as gifts of birth, how much more is this the case
with those subtler religious sentiments which we have been
considering!  One can never fathom an emotion or divine its
dictates by standing outside of it.  In the glowing hour of
excitement, however, all incomprehensibilities are solved, and
what was so enigmatical from without becomes transparently
obvious.  Each emotion obeys a logic of its own, and makes
deductions which no other logic can draw.  Piety and charity live
in a different universe from worldly lusts and fears, and form
another centre of energy altogether.  As in a supreme sorrow
lesser vexations may become a consolation; as a supreme love may
turn minor sacrifices into gain; so a supreme trust may render
common safeguards odious, and in certain glows of generous
excitement it may appear unspeakably mean to retain one’s hold of
personal possessions.  The only sound plan, if we are ourselves
outside the pale of such emotions, is to observe as well as we
are able those who feel them, and to record faithfully what we
observe; and this, I need hardly say, is what I have striven to
do in these last two descriptive lectures, which I now hope will
have covered the ground sufficiently for our present needs.
We have now passed in review the more important of the phenomena
which are regarded as fruits of genuine religion and
characteristics of men who are devout.  Today we have to change
our attitude from that of description to that of appreciation; we
have to ask whether the fruits in question can help us to judge
the absolute value of what religion adds to human life.  Were I
to parody Kant, I should say that a “Critique of pure
Saintliness” must be our theme.
If, in turning to this theme, we could descend upon our subject
from above like Catholic theologians, with our fixed definitions
of man and man’s perfection and our positive dogmas about God, we
should have an easy time of it.  Man’s perfection would be the
fulfillment of his end; and his end would be union with his
Maker.  That union could be pursued by him along three paths,
active, purgative, and contemplative, respectively; and progress
along either path would be a simple matter to measure by the
application of a limited number of theological and moral
conceptions and definitions.  The absolute significance and value
of any bit of religious experience we might hear of would thus be
given almost mathematically into our hands.
If convenience were everything, we ought now to grieve at finding
ourselves cut off from so admirably convenient a method as this. 
But we did cut ourselves off from it deliberately in those
remarks which you remember we made, in our first lecture, about
the empirical method; and it must be <321> confessed that after
that act of renunciation we can never hope for clean-cut and
scholastic results.  WE cannot divide man sharply into an animal
and a rational part.  WE cannot distinguish natural from
supernatural effects; nor among the latter know which are favors
of God, and which are counterfeit operations of the demon.  WE
have merely to collect things together without any special a
priori theological system, and out of an aggregate of piecemeal
judgments as to the value of this and that experience–judgments
in which our general philosophic prejudices, our instincts, and
our common sense are our only guides–decide that ON THE WHOLE
one type of religion is approved by its fruits, and another type
condemned.  “On the whole"–I fear we shall never escape
complicity with that qualification, so dear to your practical
man, so repugnant to your systematizer!
I also fear that as I make this frank confession, I may seem to
some of you to throw our compass overboard, and to adopt caprice
as our pilot.  Skepticism or wayward choice, you may think, can
be the only results of such a formless method as I have taken up.
A few remarks in deprecation of such an opinion, and in farther
explanation of the empiricist principles which I profess, may
therefore appear at this point to be in place.
Abstractly, it would seem illogical to try to measure the worth
of a religion’s fruits in merely human terms of value. How CAN
you measure their worth without considering whether the God
really exists who is supposed to inspire them?  If he really
exists, then all the conduct instituted by men to meet his wants
must necessarily be a reasonable fruit of his religion–it would
be unreasonable only in case he did not exist.  If, for instance,
you were to condemn a religion of human or animal sacrifices by
virtue of your subjective sentiments, and if all the while a
deity were really there demanding such sacrifices, you would be
making a theoretical mistake by tacitly assuming that the deity
must be non-existent; you would be setting up a theology of your
own as much as if you were a scholastic philosopher.
To this extent, to the extent of disbelieving peremptorily in
certain types of deity, I frankly confess that we must be
theologians.  If disbeliefs can be said to constitute a theology,
then the prejudices, instincts, and common sense which I chose as
our guides make theological partisans of us whenever they make
certain beliefs abhorrent.
But such common-sense prejudices and instincts are themselves the
fruit of an empirical evolution.  Nothing is more striking than
the secular alteration that goes on in the moral and religious
tone of men, as their insight into nature and their social
arrangements progressively develop.  After an interval of a few
generations the mental climate proves unfavorable to notions of
the deity which at an earlier date were perfectly satisfactory: 
the older gods have fallen below the common secular level, and
can no longer be believed in.  Today a deity who should require
bleeding sacrifices to placate him would be too sanguinary to be
taken seriously.  Even if powerful historical credentials were
put forward in his favor, we would not look at them.  Once, on
the contrary, his cruel appetites were of themselves credentials.
They positively recommended him to men’s imaginations in ages
when such coarse signs of power were respected and no others
could be understood.  Such deities then were worshiped because
such fruits were relished.
Doubtless historic accidents always played some later part, but
the original factor in fixing the figure of the gods must always
have been psychological.  The deity to whom the prophets, seers,
and devotees who founded the particular cult bore witness was
worth something to them personally. They could use him.  He
guided their imagination, warranted their hopes, and controlled
their will–or else they required him as a safeguard against the
demon and a curber of other people’s crimes.  In any case, they
chose him for the value of the fruits he seemed to them to yield.
So soon as the fruits began to seem quite worthless; so soon as
they conflicted with indispensable human ideals, or thwarted too
extensively other values; so soon as they appeared childish,
contemptible, or immoral when reflected on, the deity grew
discredited, and was erelong neglected and forgotten.  It was in
this way that the Greek and Roman gods ceased to be believed in
by educated pagans; it is thus that we ourselves judge of the
Hindu, Buddhist, and Mohammedan theologies; Protestants have so
dealt with the Catholic notions of deity, and liberal Protestants
with older Protestant notions; it is thus that Chinamen judge of
us, and that all of us now living will be judged by our
descendants.  When we cease to admire or approve what the
definition of a deity implies, we end by deeming that deity
incredible.
Few historic changes are more curious than these mutations of
theological opinion.  The monarchical type of sovereignty was,
for example, so ineradicably planted in the mind of our own
forefathers that a dose of cruelty and arbitrariness in their
deity seems positively to have been required by their
imagination.  They called the cruelty “retributive justice,” and
a God without it would certainly have struck them as not
"sovereign” enough.  But today we abhor the very notion of
eternal suffering inflicted; and that arbitrary dealing-out of
salvation and damnation to selected individuals, of which
Jonathan Edwards could persuade himself that he had not only a
conviction, but a “delightful conviction,” as of a doctrine
"exceeding pleasant, bright, and sweet,” appears to us, if
sovereignly anything, sovereignly irrational and mean.  Not only
the cruelty, but the paltriness of character of the gods believed
in by earlier centuries also strikes later centuries with
surprise.  We shall see examples of it from the annals of
Catholic saintship which makes us rub our Protestant eyes. 
Ritual worship in general appears to the modern
transcendentalist, as well as to the ultra-puritanic type of
mind, as if addressed to a deity of an almost absurdly childish
character, taking delight in toy-shop furniture, tapers and
tinsel, costume and mumbling and mummery, and finding his “glory"
incomprehensibly enhanced thereby:–just as on the other hand the
formless spaciousness of pantheism appears quite empty to
ritualistic natures, and the gaunt theism of evangelical sects
seems intolerably bald and chalky and bleak.
Luther, says Emerson, would have cut off his right hand rather
than nail his theses to the door at Wittenberg, if he had
supposed that they were destined to lead to the pale negations of
Boston Unitarianism.
So far, then, although we are compelled, whatever may be our
pretensions to empiricism, to employ some sort of a standard of
theological probability of our own whenever we assume to estimate
the fruits of other men’s religion, yet this very standard has
been begotten out of the drift of common life.  It is the voice
of human experience within us, judging and condemning all gods
that stand athwart the pathway along which it feels itself to be
advancing.  Experience, if we take it in the largest sense, is
thus the parent of those disbeliefs which, it was charged, were
inconsistent with the experiential method.  The inconsistency,
you see, is immaterial, and the charge may be neglected.
If we pass from disbeliefs to positive beliefs, it seems to me
that there is not even a formal inconsistency to be laid against
our method.  The gods we stand by are the gods we need and can
use, the gods whose demands on us are reinforcements of our
demands on ourselves and on one another. What I then propose to
do is, briefly stated, to test saintliness by common sense, to
use human standards to help us decide how far the religious life
commends itself as an ideal kind of human activity.  If it
commends itself, then any theological beliefs that may inspire
it, in so far forth will stand accredited.  If not, then they
will be discredited, and all without reference to anything but
human working principles.  It is but the elimination of the
humanly unfit, and the survival of the humanly fittest, applied
to religious beliefs; and if we look at history candidly and
without prejudice, we have to admit that no religion has ever in
the long run established or proved itself in any other way. 
Religions have APPROVED themselves; they have ministered to
sundry vital needs which they found reigning.  When they violated
other needs too strongly, or when other faiths came which served
the same needs better, the first religions were supplanted.
The needs were always many, and the tests were never sharp.  So
the reproach of vagueness and subjectivity and “on the
whole"-ness, which can with perfect legitimacy be addressed to
the empirical method as we are forced to use it, is after all a
reproach to which the entire life of man in dealing with these
matters is obnoxious.  No religion has ever yet owed its
prevalence to “apodictic certainty.”    In a later lecture I will
ask whether objective certainty can ever be added by theological
reasoning to a religion that already empirically prevails.
One word, also, about the reproach that in following this sort of
an empirical method we are handing ourselves over to systematic
skepticism.
Since it is impossible to deny secular alterations in our
sentiments and needs, it would be absurd to affirm that one’s own
age of the world can be beyond correction by the next age. 
Skepticism cannot, therefore, be ruled out by any set of thinkers
as a possibility against which their conclusions are secure; and
no empiricist ought to claim exemption from this universal
liability.  But to admit one’s liability to correction is one
thing, and to embark upon a sea of wanton doubt is another.  Of
willfully playing into the hands of skepticism we cannot be
accused.  He who acknowledges the imperfectness of his
instrument, and makes allowance <326> for it in discussing his
observations, is in a much better position for gaining truth than
if he claimed his instrument to be infallible.  Or is dogmatic or
scholastic theology less doubted in point of fact for claiming,
as it does, to be in point of right undoubtable?  And if not,
what command over truth would this kind of theology really lose
if, instead of absolute certainty, she only claimed reasonable
probability for her conclusions?  If WE claim only reasonable
probability, it will be as much as men who love the truth can
ever at any given moment hope to have within their grasp. Pretty
surely it will be more than we could have had, if we were
unconscious of our liability to err.
Nevertheless, dogmatism will doubtless continue to condemn us for
this confession.  The mere outward form of inalterable certainty
is so precious to some minds that to renounce it explicitly is
for them out of the question.  They will claim it even where the
facts most patently pronounce its folly.  But the safe thing is
surely to recognize that all the insights of creatures of a day
like ourselves must be provisional. The wisest of critics is an
altering being, subject to the better insight of the morrow, and
right at any moment, only “up to date” and “on the whole.”   
When larger ranges of truth open, it is surely best to be able to
open ourselves to their reception, unfettered by our previous
pretensions. “Heartily know, when half-gods go, the gods arrive.”
The fact of diverse judgments about religious phenomena is
therefore entirely unescapable, whatever may be one’s own desire
to attain the irreversible.  But apart from that fact, a more
fundamental question awaits us, the question whether men’s
opinions ought to be expected to be absolutely uniform in this
field.  Ought all men to have the same religion? Ought they to
approve the same fruits and follow the same leadings?  Are they
so like in their inner needs that, for hard and soft, for proud
and humble, for strenuous and lazy, for healthy-minded and
despairing, exactly the same religious incentives are required? 
Or are different functions in the organism of humanity allotted
to different types of man, so that some may really be the better
for a religion of consolation and reassurance, whilst others are
better for one of terror and reproof?  It might conceivably be
so; and we shall, I think, more and more suspect it to be so as
we go on. And if it be so, how can any possible judge or critic
help being biased in favor of the religion by which his own needs
are best met?  He aspires to impartiality; but he is too close to
the struggle not to be to some degree a participant, and he is
sure to approve most warmly those fruits of piety in others which
taste most good and prove most nourishing to HIM.
I am well aware of how anarchic much of what I say may sound. 
Expressing myself thus abstractly and briefly, I may seem to
despair of the very notion of truth.  But I beseech you to
reserve your judgment until we see it applied to the details
which lie before us.  I do indeed disbelieve that we or any other
mortal men can attain on a given day to absolutely incorrigible
and unimprovable truth about such matters of fact as those with
which religions deal.  But I reject this dogmatic ideal not out
of a perverse delight in intellectual instability.  I am no lover
of disorder and doubt as such.  Rather do I fear to lose truth by
this pretension to possess it already wholly.  That we can gain
more and more of it by moving always in the right direction, I
believe as much as any one, and I hope to bring you all to my way
of thinking before the termination of these lectures.  Till then,
do not, I pray you, harden your minds irrevocably against the
empiricism which I profess.
I will waste no more words, then, in abstract justification of my
method, but seek immediately to use it upon the facts.
In critically judging of the value of religious phenomena, it is
very important to insist on the distinction between religion as
an individual personal function, and religion as an
institutional, corporate, or tribal product.  I drew this
distinction, you may remember, in my second lecture.  The word
"religion,” as ordinarily used, is equivocal.  A survey of
history shows us that, as a rule, religious geniuses attract
disciples, and produce groups of sympathizers.  When these groups
get strong enough to “organize” themselves, they become
ecclesiastical institutions with corporate ambitions of their
own.  The spirit of politics and the lust of dogmatic rule are
then apt to enter and to contaminate the originally innocent
thing; so that when we hear the word “religion” nowadays, we
think inevitably of some “church” or other; and to some persons
the word “church” suggests so much hypocrisy and tyranny and
meanness and tenacity of superstition that in a wholesale
undiscerning way they glory in saying that they are “down” on
religion altogether.  Even we who belong to churches do not
exempt other churches than our own from the general condemnation.
But in this course of lectures ecclesiastical institutions hardly
concern us at all.  The religious experience which we are
studying is that which lives itself out within the private
breast.  First-hand individual experience of this kind has always
appeared as a heretical sort of innovation to those who witnessed
its birth.  Naked comes it into the world and lonely; and it has
always, for a time at least, driven him who had it into the
wilderness, often into the literal wilderness out of doors, where
the Buddha, Jesus, Mohammed, St. Francis, George Fox, and so many
others had to go.  George Fox expresses well this isolation; and
I can do no better at this point than read to you a page from his
Journal, referring to the period of his youth when religion began
to ferment within him seriously.
“I fasted much,” Fox says, “walked abroad in solitary places many
days, and often took my Bible, and sat in hollow trees and
lonesome places until night came on; and frequently in the night
walked mournfully about by myself; for I was a man of sorrows in
the time of the first workings of the Lord in me.
“During all this time I was never joined in profession of
religion with any, but gave up myself to the Lord, having
forsaken all evil company, taking leave of father and mother, and
all other relations, and traveled up and down as a stranger on
the earth, which way the Lord inclined my heart; taking a chamber
to myself in the town where I came, and tarrying sometimes more,
sometimes less in a place:  for I durst not stay long in a place,
being afraid both of professor and profane, lest, being a tender
young man, I should be hurt by conversing much with either.  For
which reason I kept much as a stranger, seeking heavenly wisdom
and getting knowledge from the Lord; and was brought off from
outward things, to rely on the Lord alone.  As I had forsaken the
priests, so I left the separate preachers also, and those called
the most experienced people; for I saw there was none among them
all that could speak to my condition.  And when all my hopes in
them and in all men were gone so that I had nothing outwardly to
help me, nor could tell what to do; then, oh then, I heard a
voice which said, ’There is one, even Jesus Christ, that can
speak to thy condition.’  When I heard it, my heart did leap for
joy.  Then the Lord let me see why there was none upon the earth
that could speak to my condition. I had not fellowship with any
people, priests, nor professors, nor any sort of separated
people.  I was afraid of all carnal talk and talkers, for I could
see nothing but corruptions.  When I was in the deep, under all
shut up, I could not believe that I should ever overcome; my
troubles, my sorrows, and my temptations were so great that I
often thought I should have despaired, I was so tempted.  But
when Christ opened to me how he was tempted by the same devil,
and had overcome him, and had bruised his head; and that through
him and his power, life, grace, and spirit, I should overcome
also, I had confidence in him.  If I had had a king’s diet,
palace, and attendance, all would have been as nothing, for
nothing gave me comfort but the Lord by his power.  I saw
professors, priests, and people were whole and at ease in that
condition which was my misery, and they loved that which I would
have been rid of.  But the Lord did stay my desires upon himself,
and my care was cast upon him alone."[198]
[198] George Fox:  Journal, Philadelphia, 1800, pp. 59-61,
abridged.
A genuine first-hand religious experience like this is bound to
be a heterodoxy to its witnesses, the prophet appearing as a mere
lonely madman.  If his doctrine prove contagious enough to spread
to any others, it becomes a definite and labeled heresy.  But if
it then still prove contagious enough to triumph over
persecution, it becomes itself an orthodoxy; and when a religion
has become an orthodoxy, its day of inwardness is over:  the
spring is dry; the faithful live at second hand exclusively and
stone the prophets in their turn.  The new church, in spite of
whatever human goodness it may foster, can be henceforth counted
on as a staunch ally in every attempt to stifle the spontaneous
religious spirit, and to stop all later bubblings of the fountain
from which in purer days it drew its own supply of inspiration.
Unless, indeed, by adopting new movements of the spirit it can
make capital out of them and use them for its selfish corporate
designs! Of protective action of this politic sort, promptly or
tardily decided on, the dealings of the Roman ecclesiasticism
with many individual saints and prophets yield examples enough
for our instruction.
The plain fact is that men’s minds are built, as has been often
said, in water-tight compartments.  Religious after a fashion,
they yet have many other things in them beside their religion,
and unholy entanglements and associations inevitably obtain.  The
basenesses so commonly charged to religion’s account are thus,
almost all of them, not chargeable at all to religion proper, but
rather to religion’s wicked practical partner, the spirit of
corporate dominion.  And the bigotries are most of them in their
turn chargeable to religion’s wicked intellectual partner, the
spirit of dogmatic dominion, the passion for laying down the law
in the form of an absolutely closed-in theoretic system.  The
ecclesiastical spirit in general is the sum of these two spirits
of dominion; and I beseech you never to confound the phenomena of
mere tribal or corporate psychology which it presents with those
manifestations of the purely interior life which are the
exclusive object of our study.  The baiting of Jews, the hunting
of Albigenses and Waldenses, the stoning of Quakers and ducking
of Methodists, the murdering of Mormons and the massacring of
Armenians, express much rather that aboriginal human neophobia,
that pugnacity of which we all share the vestiges, and that
inborn hatred of the alien and of eccentric and non-conforming
men as aliens, than they express the positive piety of the
various perpetrators.  Piety is the mask, the inner force is
tribal instinct.  You believe as little as I do, in spite of the
Christian unction with which the German emperor addressed his
troops upon their way to China, that the conduct which he
suggested, and in which other Christian armies went beyond them,
had anything whatever to do with the interior religious life of
those concerned in the performance.
Well, no more for past atrocities than for this atrocity should
we make piety responsible.  At most we may blame piety for not
availing to check our natural passions, and sometimes for
supplying them with hypocritical pretexts. But hypocrisy also
imposes obligations, and with the pretext usually couples some
restriction; and when the passion gust is over, the piety may
bring a reaction of repentance which the irreligious natural man
would not have shown.
For many of the historic aberrations which have been laid to her
charge, religion as such, then, is not to blame.  Yet of the
charge that over-zealousness or fanaticism is one of her
liabilities we cannot wholly acquit her, so I will next make a
remark upon that point.  But I will preface it by a preliminary
remark which connects itself with much that follows.
 
Our survey of the phenomena of saintliness has unquestionably
produced in your minds an impression of extravagance. Is it
necessary, some of you have asked, as one example after another
came before us, to be quite so fantastically good as that?  We
who have no vocation for the extremer ranges of sanctity will
surely be let off at the last day if our humility, asceticism,
and devoutness prove of a less convulsive sort.  This practically
amounts to saying that much that it is legitimate to admire in
this field need nevertheless not be imitated, and that religious
phenomena, like all other human phenomena, are subject to the law
of the golden mean.  Political reformers accomplish their
successive tasks in the history of nations by being blind for the
time to other causes.  Great schools of art work out the effects
which it is their mission to reveal, at the cost of a
one-sidedness for which other schools must make amends.  We
accept a John Howard, a Mazzini, a Botticelli, a Michael Angelo,
with a kind of indulgence.  We are glad they existed to show us
that way, but we are glad there are also other ways of seeing and
taking life.  So of many of the saints whom we have looked at. 
We are proud of a human nature that could be so passionately
extreme, but we shrink from advising others to follow the
example.  The conduct we blame ourselves for not following lies
nearer to the middle line of human effort. It is less dependent
on particular beliefs and doctrines.  It is such as wears well in
different ages, such as under different skies all judges are able
to commend.
The fruits of religion, in other words, are, like all human
products, liable to corruption by excess.  Common sense must
judge them.  It need not blame the votary; but it may be able to
praise him only conditionally, as one who acts faithfully
according to his lights.  He shows us heroism in one way, but the
unconditionally good way is that for which no indulgence need be
asked.
 
We find that error by excess is exemplified by every saintly
virtue.  Excess, in human faculties, means usually one-sidedness
or want of balance; for it is hard to imagine an essential
faculty too strong, if only other faculties equally strong be
there to cooperate with it in action.  Strong affections need a
strong will; strong active powers need a strong intellect; strong
intellect needs strong sympathies, to keep life steady.  If the
balance exist, no one faculty can possibly be too strong–we only
get the stronger all-round character.  In the life of saints,
technically so called, the spiritual faculties are strong, but
what gives the impression of extravagance proves usually on
examination to be a relative deficiency of intellect.  Spiritual
excitement takes pathological forms whenever other interests are
too few and the intellect too narrow.  We find this exemplified
by all the saintly attributes in turn–devout love of God,
purity, charity, asceticism, all may lead astray.  I will run
over these virtues in succession.
First of all let us take Devoutness.  When unbalanced, one of its
vices is called Fanaticism.  Fanaticism (when not a mere
expression of ecclesiastical ambition) is only loyalty carried to
a convulsive extreme.  When an intensely loyal and narrow mind is
once grasped by the feeling that a certain superhuman person is
worthy of its exclusive devotion, one of the first things that
happens is that it idealizes the devotion itself.  To adequately
realize the merits of the idol gets to be considered the one
great merit of the worshiper; and the sacrifices and servilities
by which savage tribesmen have from time immemorial exhibited
their faithfulness to chieftains are now outbid in favor of the
deity.  Vocabularies are exhausted and languages altered in the
attempt to praise him enough; death is looked on as gain if it
attract his grateful notice; and the personal attitude of being
his devotee becomes what one might almost call a new and exalted
kind of professional specialty within the tribe.[199] The legends
that gather round the lives of holy persons are fruits of this
impulse to celebrate and glorify.  The Buddha[200] and
Mohammed[201] and their companions and many Christian saints are
incrusted with a heavy jewelry of anecdotes which are meant to be
honorific, but are simply abgeschmackt and silly, and form a
touching expression of man’s misguided propensity to praise.
[199] Christian saints have had their specialties of devotion,
Saint Francis to Christ’s wounds; Saint Anthony of Padua to
Christ’s childhood; Saint Bernard to his humanity; Saint Teresa
to Saint Joseph, etc.  The Shi-ite Mohammedans venerate Ali, the
Prophet’s son-in-law, instead of Abu-bekr, his brother-in-law. 
Vambery describes a dervish whom he met in Persia, “who had
solemnly vowed, thirty years before, that he would never employ
his organs of speech otherwise but in uttering, everlastingly,
the name of his favorite, Ali, Ali.  He thus wished to signify to
the world that he was the most devoted partisan of that Ali who
had been dead a thousand years.  In his own home, speaking with
his wife, children, and friends, no other word but ’Ali!’ ever
passed his lips.  If he wanted food or drink or anything else, he
expressed his wants still by repeating ’Ali!’  Begging or buying
at the bazaar, it was always ’Ali!’  Treated ill or generously,
he would still harp on his monotonous ’Ali!’  Latterly his zeal
assumed such tremendous proportions that, like a madman, he would
race, the whole day, up and down the streets of the town,
throwing his stick high up into the air, and shriek our, all the
while, at the top of his voice, ’Ali!’  This dervish was
venerated by everybody as a saint, and received everywhere with
the greatest distinction.”  Arminius Vambery, his Life and
Adventures, written by Himself, London, 1889, p. 69.  On the
anniversary of the death of Hussein, Ali’s son, the Shi-ite
Moslems still make the air resound with cries of his name and
Ali’s.
[200] Compare H. C. Warren:  Buddhism in Translation, Cambridge,
U.S., 1898, passim.
[201] Compare J. L. Merrick:  The Life and Religion of Mohammed,
as contained in the Sheeah traditions of the Hyat-ul-Kuloob,
Boston. 1850, passim.
An immediate consequence of this condition of mind is jealousy
for the deity’s honor.  How can the devotee show his loyalty
better than by sensitiveness in this regard?  The slightest
affront or neglect must be resented, the deity’s enemies must be
put to shame.  In exceedingly narrow minds and active wills, such
a care may become an engrossing preoccupation; and crusades have
been preached and massacres instigated for no other reason than
to remove a fancied slight upon the God.  Theologies representing
the gods as mindful of their glory, and churches with
imperialistic policies, have conspired to fan this temper to a
glow, so that intolerance and persecution have come to be vices
associated by some of us inseparably with the saintly mind. They
are unquestionably its besetting sins.  The saintly temper is a
moral temper, and a moral temper has often to be cruel.  It is a
partisan temper, and that is cruel.  Between his own and
Jehovah’s enemies a David knows no difference; a Catherine of
Siena, panting to stop the warfare among Christians which was the
scandal of her epoch, can think of no better method of union
among them than a crusade to massacre the Turks; Luther finds no
word of protest or regret over the atrocious tortures with which
the Anabaptist leaders were put to death; and a Cromwell praises
the Lord for delivering his enemies into his hands for
"execution.”  Politics come in in all such cases; but piety finds
the partnership not quite unnatural.  So, when “freethinkers"
tell us that religion and fanaticism are twins, we cannot make an
unqualified denial of the charge.
Fanaticism must then be inscribed on the wrong side of religion’s
account, so long as the religious person’s intellect is on the
stage which the despotic kind of God satisfies.  But as soon as
the God is represented as less intent on his own honor and glory,
it ceases to be a danger.
Fanaticism is found only where the character is masterful and
aggressive.  In gentle characters, where devoutness is intense
and the intellect feeble, we have an imaginative absorption in
the love of God to the exclusion of all practical human
interests, which, though innocent enough, is too one-sided to be
admirable.  A mind too narrow has room but for one kind of
affection.  When the love of God takes possession of such a mind,
it expels all human loves and human uses.  There is no English
name for such a sweet excess of devotion, so I will refer to it
as a theopathic condition.
The blessed Margaret Mary Alacoque may serve as an example.
“To be loved here upon the earth,” her recent biographer
exclaims:  “to be loved by a noble, elevated, distinguished
being; to be loved with fidelity, with devotion–what
enchantment! But to be loved by God! and loved by him to
distraction [aime jusqu’a la folie]!–Margaret melted away with
love at the thought of such a thing.  Like Saint Philip of Neri
in former times, or like Saint Francis Xavier, she said to God: 
’Hold back, O my God, these torrents which overwhelm me, or else
enlarge my capacity for their reception."[202]
[202] Bougaud:  Hist. de la bienheureuse Marguerite Marie, Paris,
1894, p. 145.
The most signal proofs of God’s love which Margaret Mary received
were her hallucinations of sight, touch, and hearing, and the
most signal in turn of these were the revelations of Christ’s
sacred heart, “surrounded with rays more brilliant than the Sun,
and transparent like a crystal.  The wound which he received on
the cross visibly appeared upon it.  There was a crown of thorns
round about this divine Heart, and a cross above it.”  At the
same time Christ’s voice told her that, unable longer to contain
the flames of his love for mankind, he had chosen her by a
miracle to spread the knowledge of them.  He thereupon took out
her mortal heart, placed it inside of his own and inflamed it,
and then replaced it in her breast, adding:  “Hitherto thou hast
taken the name of my slave, hereafter thou shalt be called the
well-beloved disciple of my Sacred Heart.”
In a later vision the Saviour revealed to her in detail the
"great design” which he wished to establish through her
instrumentality.  “I ask of thee to bring it about that every
first Friday after the week of holy Sacrament shall be made into
a special holy day for honoring my Heart by a general communion
and by services intended to make honorable amends for the
indignities which it has received.  And I promise thee that my
Heart will dilate to shed with abundance the influences of its
love upon all those who pay to it these honors, or who bring it
about that others do the same.”
“This revelation,” says Mgr. Bougaud, “is unquestionably the most
important of all the revelations which have illumined the Church
since that of the Incarnation and of the Lord’s Supper. . . . 
After the Eucharist, the supreme effort of the Sacred
Heart."[203]  Well, what were its good fruits for Margaret Mary’s
life?  Apparently little else but sufferings and prayers and
absences of mind and swoons and ecstasies.  She became
increasingly useless about the convent, her absorption in
Christ’s love–
“which grew upon her daily, rendering her more and more incapable
of attending to external duties.  They tried her in the
infirmary, but without much success, although her kindness, zeal,
and devotion were without bounds, and her charity rose to acts of
such a heroism that our readers would not bear the recital of
them.  They tried her in the kitchen, but were forced to give it
up as hopeless–everything dropped out of her hands.  The
admirable humility with which she made amends for her clumsiness
could not prevent this from being prejudicial to the order and
regularity which must always reign in a community. They put her
in the school, where the little girls cherished her, and cut
pieces out of her clothes [for relics] as if she were already a
saint, but where she was too absorbed inwardly to pay the
necessary attention.  Poor dear sister, even less after her
visions than before them was she a denizen of earth, and they had
to leave her in her heaven."[204]
[203] Bougaud:  Hist. de la bienheureuse Marguerite Marie,
Paris, 1894, pp. 365, 241.
[204] Bougaud:  Op. cit., p. 267.
Poor dear sister, indeed! Amiable and good, but so feeble of
intellectual outlook that it would be too much to ask of us, with
our Protestant and modern education, to feel anything but
indulgent pity for the kind of saintship which she embodies.  A
lower example still of theopathic saintliness is that of Saint
Gertrude, a Benedictine nun of the thirteenth century, whose
"Revelations,” a well-known mystical authority, consist mainly of
proofs of Christ’s partiality for her undeserving person. 
Assurances of his love, intimacies and caresses and compliments
of the most absurd and puerile sort, addressed by Christ to
Gertrude as an individual, form the tissue of this paltry-minded
recital.[205] In reading such a narrative, we realize the gap
between the thirteenth and the twentieth century, and we feel
that saintliness of character may yield almost absolutely
worthless fruits if it be associated with such inferior
intellectual sympathies.  What with science, idealism, and
democracy, our own imagination has grown to need a God of an
entirely different temperament from that Being interested
exclusively in dealing out personal favors, with whom our
ancestors were so contented.  Smitten as we are with the vision
of social righteousness, a God indifferent to everything but
adulation, and full of partiality for his individual favorites,
lacks an essential element of largeness; and even the best
professional sainthood of former centuries, pent in as it is to
such a conception, seems to us curiously shallow and unedifying.
[205] Examples:  “Suffering from a headache, she sought, for the
glory of God, to relieve herself by holding certain odoriferous
substances in her mouth, when the Lord appeared to her to lean
over towards her lovingly, and to find comfort Himself in these
odors.  After having gently breathed them in, He arose, and said
with a gratified air to the Saints, as if contented with what He
had done: ’see the new present which my betrothed has given Me!’
“One day, at chapel, she heard supernaturally sung the words
’Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus.’ The son of God leaning towards her
like a sweet lover, and giving to her soul the softest kiss, said
to her at the second Sanctus:  ’In this Sanctus addressed to my
person, receive with this kiss all the sanctity of my divinity
and of my humanity, and let it be to thee a sufficient
preparation for approaching the communion table.’ And the next
following Sunday, while she was thanking God for this favor,
behold the Son of God, more beauteous than thousands of angels,
takes her in His arms as if He were proud of her and presents her
to God the Father, in that perfection of sanctity with which He
had dowered her.  And the Father took such delight in this soul
thus presented by His only son, that, as if unable longer to
restrain Himself, He gave her, and the Holy Ghost gave her also,
the sanctity attributed to each by His own Sanctus–and thus she
remained endowed with the plenary fullness of the blessing of
Sanctity, bestowed on her by Omnipotence, by Wisdom, and by
Love.”  Revelations de Sainte Gertrude, Paris, 1898, i. 44, 186.
Take Saint Teresa, for example, one of the ablest women, in many
respects, of whose life we have the record.  She had a powerful
intellect of the practical order.  She wrote admirable
descriptive psychology, possessed a will equal to any emergency,
great talent for politics and business, a buoyant disposition,
and a first-rate literary style.  She was tenaciously aspiring,
and put her whole life at the service of her religious ideals. 
Yet so paltry were these, according to our present way of
thinking, that (although I know that others have been moved
differently) I confess that my only feeling in reading her has
been pity that so much vitality of soul should have found such
poor employment.
In spite of the sufferings which she endured, there is a curious
flavor of superficiality about her genius.  A Birmingham
anthropologist, Dr. Jordan, has divided the human race into two
types, whom he calls “shrews” and “nonshrews” respectively.[206]
The shrew-type is defined as possessing an “active unimpassioned
temperament.”  In other words, shrews are the “motors,” rather
than the “sensories,"[207] and their expressions are as a rule
more energetic than the feelings which appear to prompt them. 
Saint Teresa, paradoxical as such a judgment may sound, was a
typical shrew, in this sense of the term.  The bustle of her
style, as well as of her life, proves it.  Not only must she
receive unheard-of personal favors and spiritual graces from her
Saviour, but she must immediately write about them and exploiter
them professionally, and use her expertness to give instruction
to those less privileged.  Her voluble egotism; her sense, not of
radical bad being, as the really contrite have it, but of her
"faults” and “imperfections” in the plural; her stereotyped
humility and return upon herself, as covered with “confusion” at
each new manifestation of God’s singular partiality for a person
so unworthy, are typical of shrewdom:  a paramountly feeling
nature would be objectively lost in gratitude, and silent.  She
had some public instincts, it is true; she hated the Lutherans,
and longed for the church’s triumph over them; but in the main
her idea of religion seems to have been that of an endless
amatory flirtation–if one may say so without irreverence–
between the devotee and the deity; and apart from helping younger
nuns to go in this direction by the inspiration of her example
and instruction, there is absolutely no human use in her, or sign
of any general human interest.  Yet the spirit of her age, far
from rebuking her, exalted her as superhuman.
[206]  Furneaux Jordan:  Character in Birth and Parentage, first
edition. Later editions change the nomenclature.
[207] As to this distinction, see the admirably practical account
in J. M. Baldwin’s little book, The Story of the Mind, 1898.
We have to pass a similar judgment on the whole notion of
saintship based on merits.  Any God who, on the one hand, can
care to keep a pedantically minute account of individual
shortcomings, and on the other can feel such partialities, and
load particular creatures with such insipid marks of favor, is
too small-minded a God for our credence.  When Luther, in his
immense manly way, swept off by a stroke of his hand the very
notion of a debit and credit account kept with individuals by the
Almighty, he stretched the soul’s imagination and saved theology
from puerility.
 
So much for mere devotion, divorced from the intellectual
conceptions which might guide it towards bearing useful human
fruit.
The next saintly virtue in which we find excess is Purity.  In
theopathic characters, like those whom we have just considered,
the love of God must not be mixed with any other love.  Father
and mother, sisters, brothers, and friends are felt as
interfering distractions; for sensitiveness and narrowness, when
they occur together, as they often do, require above all things a
simplified world to dwell in.  Variety and confusion are too much
for their powers of comfortable adaptation.  But whereas your
aggressive pietist reaches his unity objectively, by forcibly
stamping disorder and divergence out, your retiring pietist
reaches his subjectively, leaving disorder in the world at large,
but making a smaller world in which he dwells himself and from
which he eliminates it altogether.  Thus, alongside of the church
militant with its prisons, dragonnades, and inquisition methods,
we have the church fugient, as one might call it, with its
hermitages, monasteries, and sectarian organizations, both
churches pursuing the same object–to unify the life,[208] and
simplify the spectacle presented to the soul.  A mind extremely
sensitive to inner discords will drop one external relation after
another, as interfering with the absorption of consciousness in
spiritual things.  Amusements must go first, then conventional
"society,” then business, then family duties, until at last
seclusion, with a subdivision of the day into hours for stated
religious acts, is the only thing that can be borne.  The lives
of saints are a history of successive renunciations of
complication, one form of contact with the outer life being
dropped after another, to save the purity of inner tone.[209] 
"Is it not better,” a young sister asks her Superior, “that I
should not speak at all during the hour of recreation, so as not
to run the risk, by speaking, of falling into some sin of which I
might not be conscious?"[210]  If the life remains a social one
at all, those who take part in it must follow one identical rule.
Embosomed in this monotony, the zealot for purity feels clean and
free once more.  The minuteness of uniformity maintained in
certain sectarian communities, whether monastic or not, is
something almost inconceivable to a man of the world.  Costume,
phraseology, hours, and habits are absolutely stereotyped, and
there is no doubt that some persons are so made as to find in
this stability an incomparable kind of mental rest.
[208] On this subject I refer to the work of M. Murisier (Les
Maladies du sentiment Religieux, Paris, 1901), who makes inner
unification the mainspring of the whole religious life.  But ALL
strongly ideal interests, religious or irreligious, unify the
mind and tend to subordinate everything to themselves.  One would
infer from M. Murisier’s pages that this formal condition was
peculiarly characteristic of religion, and that one might in
comparison almost neglect material content, in studying the
latter.  I trust that the present work will convince the reader
that religion has plenty of material content which is
characteristic and which is more important by far than any
general psychological form.  In spite of this criticism, I find
M. Murisier’s book highly instructive.
[209] Example:  “At the first beginning of the Servitor’s
[Suso’s] interior life, after he had purified his soul properly
by confession, he marked out for himself, in thought, three
circles, within which he shut himself up, as in a spiritual
intrenchment.  The first circle was his cell, his chapel, and the
choir.  When he was within this circle, he seemed to himself in
complete security.  The second circle was the whole monastery as
far as the outer gate.  The third and outermost circle was the
gate itself, and here it was necessary for him to stand well upon
his guard.  When he went outside these circles, it seemed to him
that he was in the plight of some wild animal which is outside
its hole, and surrounded by the hunt, and therefore in need of
all its cunning and watchfulness.”  The Life of the Blessed Henry
Suso, by Himself, translated by Knox, London, 1865, p. 168.
[210] Vie des premieres Religieuses Dominicaines de la
Congregation de St. Dominique, a Nancy; Nancy, 1896, p. 129.
We have no time to multiply examples, so I will let the case of
Saint Louis of Gonzaga serve as a type of excess in purification.
I think you will agree that this youth carried the elimination of
the external and discordant to a point which we cannot
unreservedly admire.  At the age of ten, his biographer says:–
“The inspiration came to him to consecrate to the Mother of God
his own virginity–that being to her the most agreeable of
possible presents.  Without delay, then, and with all the fervor
there was in him, joyous of heart, and burning with love, he made
his vow of perpetual chastity.  Mary accepted the offering of his
innocent heart, and obtained for him from God, as a recompense,
the extraordinary grace of never feeling during his entire life
the slightest touch of temptation against the virtue of purity. 
This was an altogether exceptional favor, rarely accorded even to
Saints themselves, and all the more marvelous in that Louis dwelt
always in courts and among great folks, where danger and
opportunity are so unusually frequent.  It is true that Louis
from his earliest childhood had shown a natural repugnance for
whatever might be impure or unvirginal, and even for relations of
any sort whatever between persons of opposite sex.  But this made
it all the more surprising that he should, especially since this
vow, feel it necessary to have recourse to such a number of
expedients for protecting against even the shadow of danger the
virginity which he had thus consecrated.  One might suppose that
if any one could have contented himself with the ordinary
precautions, prescribed for all Christians, it would assuredly
have been he.  But no! In the use of preservatives and means of
defense, in flight from the most insignificant occasions, from
every possibility of peril, just as in the mortification of his
flesh, he went farther than the majority of saints.  He, who by
an extraordinary protection of God’s grace was never tempted,
measured all his steps as if he were threatened on every side by
particular dangers.  Thenceforward he never raised his eyes,
either when walking in the streets, or when in society.  Not only
did he avoid all business with females even more scrupulously
than before, but he renounced all conversation and every kind of
social recreation with them, although his father tried to make
him take part; and he commenced only too early to deliver his
innocent body to austerities of every kind."[211]
[211] Meschler’s Life of Saint Louis of Gonzaga, French
translation by Lebrequier, 1891, p. 40.
At the age of twelve, we read of this young man that “if by
chance his mother sent one of her maids of honor to him with a
message, he never allowed her to come in, but listened to her
through the barely opened door, and dismissed her immediately. 
He did not like to be alone with his own mother, whether at table
or in conversation; and when the rest of the company withdrew, he
sought also a pretext for retiring. . . .  Several great ladies,
relatives of his, he avoided learning to know even by sight; and
he made a sort of treaty with his father, engaging promptly and
readily to accede to all his wishes, if he might only be excused
from all visits to ladies.” [212]
[212] Ibid., p. 71.
When he was seventeen years old Louis joined the Jesuit
order,[213] against his father’s passionate entreaties, for he
was heir of a princely house; and when a year later the father
died, he took the loss as a “particular attention” to himself on
God’s part, and wrote letters of stilted good advice, as from a
spiritual superior, to his grieving mother.  He soon became so
good a monk that if any one asked him the number of his brothers
and sisters, he had to reflect and count them over before
replying.  A Father asked him one day if he were never troubled
by the thought of his family, to which, “I never think of them
except when praying for them,” was his only answer.  Never was he
seen to hold in his hand a flower or anything perfumed, that he
might take pleasure in it.  On the contrary, in the hospital, he
used to seek for whatever was most disgusting, and eagerly snatch
the bandages of ulcers, etc., from the hands of his companions. 
He avoided worldly talk, and immediately tried to turn every
conversation on to pious subjects, or else he remained silent. 
He systematically refused to notice his surroundings.  Being
ordered one day to bring a book from the rector’s seat in the
refectory, he had to ask where the rector sat, for in the three
months he had eaten bread there, so carefully did he guard his
eyes that he had not noticed the place.  One day, during recess,
having looked by chance on one of his companions, he reproached
himself as for a grave sin against modesty.  He cultivated
silence, as preserving from sins of the tongue; and his greatest
penance was the limit which his superiors set to his bodily
penances.  He sought after false accusations and unjust
reprimands as opportunities of humility; and such was his
obedience that, when a room-mate, having no more paper, asked him
for a sheet, he did not feel free to give it to him without first
obtaining the permission of the superior, who, as such, stood in
the place of God, and transmitted his orders.
[213] In his boyish note-book he praises the monastic life for
its freedom from sin, and for the imperishable treasures, which
it enables us to store up, “of merit in God’s eyes which makes of
Him our debtor for all Eternity.”  Loc. cit., p. 62.
I can find no other sorts of fruit than these of Louis’s
saintship.  He died in 1591, in his twenty-ninth year, and is
known in the Church as the patron of all young people.  On his
festival, the altar in the chapel devoted to him in a certain
church in Rome “is embosomed in flowers, arranged with exquisite
taste; and a pile of letters may be seen at its foot, written to
the Saint by young men and women, and directed to ’Paradiso.’
They are supposed to be burnt unread except by San Luigi, who
must find singular petitions in these pretty little missives,
tied up now with a green ribbon, expressive of hope, now with a
red one, emblematic of love,” etc.[214]
[214] Mademoiselle Mori, a novel quoted in Hare’s Walks in Rome,
1900, i. 55.
I cannot resist the temptation to quote from Starbuck’s book, p.
388, another case of purification by elimination.  It runs as
follows:–
“The signs of abnormality which sanctified persons show are of
frequent occurrence.  They get out of tune with other people;
often they will have nothing to do with churches, which they
regard as worldly; they become hypercritical towards others; they
grow careless of their social, political, and financial
obligations.  As an instance of this type may be mentioned a
woman of sixty-eight of whom the writer made a special study. 
She had been a member of one of the most active and progressive
churches in a busy part of a large city.  Her pastor described
her as having reached the censorious stage.  She had grown more
and more out of sympathy with the church; her connection with it
finally consisted simply in attendance at prayer-meeting, at
which her only message was that of reproof and condemnation of
the others for living on a low plane.  At last she withdrew from
fellowship with any church.  The writer found her living alone in
a little room on the top story of a cheap boarding-house quite
out of touch with all human relations, but apparently happy in
the enjoyment of her own spiritual blessings.  Her time was
occupied in writing booklets on sanctification–page after page
of dreamy rhapsody.  She proved to be one of a small group of
persons who claim that entire salvation involves three steps
instead of two; not only must there be conversion and
sanctification, but a third, which they call ’crucifixion’ or
’perfect redemption,’ and which seems to bear the same relation
to sanctification that this bears to conversion.  She related how
the Spirit had said to her, ’Stop going to church.  Stop going to
holiness meetings.  Go to your own room and I will teach you.’
She professes to care nothing for colleges, or preachers, or
churches, but only cares to listen to what God says to her.  Her
description of her experience seemed entirely consistent; she is
happy and contented, and her life is entirely satisfactory to
herself.  While listening to her own story, one was tempted to
forget that it was from the life of a person who could not live
by it in conjunction with her fellows.”
Our final judgment of the worth of such a life as this will
depend largely on our conception of God, and of the sort of
conduct he is best pleased with in his creatures.  The
Catholicism of the sixteenth century paid little heed to social
righteousness; and to leave the world to the devil whilst saving
one’s own soul was then accounted no discreditable scheme. 
To-day, rightly or wrongly, helpfulness in general human affairs
is, in consequence of one of those secular mutations in moral
sentiment of which I spoke, deemed an essential element of worth
in character; and to be of some public or private use is also
reckoned as a species of divine service.  Other early Jesuits,
especially the missionaries among them, the Xaviers, Brebeufs,
Jogues, were objective minds, and fought in their way for the
world’s welfare; so their lives to-day inspire us.  But when the
intellect, as in this Louis, is originally no larger than a pin’s
head, and cherishes ideas of God of corresponding smallness, the
result, notwithstanding the heroism put forth, is on the whole
repulsive.  Purity, we see in the object-lesson, is NOT the one
thing needful; and it is better that a life should contract many
a dirt-mark, than forfeit usefulness in its efforts to remain
unspotted.
Proceeding onwards in our search of religious extravagance, we
next come upon excesses of Tenderness and Charity.  Here
saintliness has to face the charge of preserving the unfit, and
breeding parasites and beggars.  “Resist not evil,” “Love your
enemies,” these are saintly maxims of which men of this world
find it hard to speak without impatience. Are the men of this
world right, or are the saints in possession of the deeper range
of truth?
No simple answer is possible.  Here, if anywhere, one feels the
complexity of the moral life, and the mysteriousness of the way
in which facts and ideals are interwoven.
Perfect conduct is a relation between three terms:  the actor,
the objects for which he acts, and the recipients of the action. 
In order that conduct should be abstractly perfect, all three
terms, intention, execution, and reception, should be suited to
one another.  The best intention will fail if it either work by
false means or address itself to the wrong recipient.  Thus no
critic or estimator of the value of conduct can confine himself
to the actor’s animus alone, apart from the other elements of the
performance.  As there is no worse lie than a truth misunderstood
by those who hear it, so reasonable arguments, challenges to
magnanimity, and appeals to sympathy or justice, are folly when
we are dealing with human crocodiles and boa-constrictors.  The
saint may simply give the universe into the hands of the enemy by
his trustfulness.  He may by non-resistance cut off his own
survival.
Herbert Spencer tells us that the perfect man’s conduct will
appear perfect only when the environment is perfect:  to no
inferior environment is it suitably adapted.  We may paraphrase
this by cordially admitting that saintly conduct would be the
most perfect conduct conceivable in an environment where all were
saints already; but by adding that in an environment where few
are saints, and many the exact reverse of saints, it must be ill
adapted.  We must frankly confess, then, using our empirical
common sense and ordinary practical prejudices, that in the world
that actually is, the virtues of sympathy, charity, and
non-resistance may be, and often have been, manifested in excess.
The powers of darkness have systematically taken advantage of
them.  The whole modern scientific organization of charity is a
consequence of the failure of simply giving alms.  The whole
history of constitutional government is a commentary on the
excellence of resisting evil, and when one cheek is smitten, of
smiting back and not turning the other cheek also.
You will agree to this in general, for in spite of the Gospel, in
spite of Quakerism, in spite of Tolstoi, you believe in fighting
fire with fire, in shooting down usurpers, locking up thieves,
and freezing out vagabonds and swindlers.
And yet you are sure, as I am sure, that were the world confined
to these hard-headed, hard-hearted, and hard-fisted methods
exclusively, were there no one prompt to help a brother first,
and find out afterwards whether he were worthy; no one willing to
drown his private wrongs in pity for the wronger’s person; no one
ready to be duped many a time rather than live always on
suspicion; no one glad to treat individuals passionately and
impulsively rather than by general rules of prudence; the world
would be an infinitely worse place than it is now to live in. 
The tender grace, not of a day that is dead, but of a day yet to
be born somehow, with the golden rule grown natural, would be cut
out from the perspective of our imaginations.
The saints, existing in this way, may, with their extravagances
of human tenderness, be prophetic.  Nay, innumerable times they
have proved themselves prophetic.  Treating those whom they met,
in spite of the past, in spite of all appearances, as worthy,
they have stimulated them to BE worthy, miraculously transformed
them by their radiant example and by the challenge of their
expectation.
From this point of view we may admit the human charity which we
find in all saints, and the great excess of it which we find in
some saints, to be a genuinely creative social force, tending to
make real a degree of virtue which it alone is ready to assume as
possible.  The saints are authors, auctores, increasers, of
goodness.  The potentialities of development in human souls are
unfathomable.  So many who seemed irretrievably hardened have in
point of fact been softened, converted, regenerated, in ways that
amazed the subjects even more than they surprised the spectators,
that we never can be sure in advance of any man that his
salvation by the way of love is hopeless.  We have no right to
speak of human crocodiles and boa-constrictors as of fixedly
incurable beings.  We know not the complexities of personality,
the smouldering emotional fires, the other facets of the
character-polyhedron, the resources of the subliminal region. 
St. Paul long ago made our ancestors familiar with the idea that
every soul is virtually sacred.  Since Christ died for us all
without exception, St. Paul said, we must despair of no one. 
This belief in the essential sacredness of every one expresses
itself to-day in all sorts of humane customs and reformatory
institutions, and in a growing aversion to the death penalty and
to brutality in punishment.  The saints, with their extravagance
of human tenderness, are the great torch-bearers of this belief,
the tip of the wedge, the clearers of the darkness.  Like the
single drops which sparkle in the sun as they are flung far ahead
of the advancing edge of a wave-crest or of a flood, they show
the way and are forerunners.  The world is not yet with them, so
they often seem in the midst of the world’s affairs to be
preposterous.  Yet they are impregnators of the world, vivifiers
and animaters of potentialities of goodness which but for them
would lie forever dormant.  It is not possible to be quite as
mean as we naturally are, when they have passed before us.  One
fire kindles another; and without that over-trust in human worth
which they show, the rest of us would lie in spiritual stagnancy.
Momentarily considered, then, the saint may waste his tenderness
and be the dupe and victim of his charitable fever, but the
general function of his charity in social evolution is vital and
essential.  If things are ever to move upward, some one must be
ready to take the first step, and assume the risk of it.  No one
who is not willing to try charity, to try non-resistance as the
saint is always willing, can tell whether these methods will or
will not succeed.  When they do succeed, they are far more
powerfully successful than force or worldly prudence.  Force
destroys enemies; and the best that can be said of prudence is
that it keeps what we already have in safety.  But
non-resistance, when successful, turns enemies into friends; and
charity regenerates its objects.  These saintly methods are, as I
said, creative energies; and genuine saints find in the elevated
excitement with which their faith endows them an authority and
impressiveness which makes them irresistible in situations where
men of shallower nature cannot get on at all without the use of
worldly prudence.  This practical proof that worldly wisdom may
be safely transcended is the saint’s magic gift to mankind.[215]
Not only does his vision of a better world console us for the
generally prevailing prose and barrenness; but even when on the
whole we have to confess him ill adapted, he makes some converts,
and the environment gets better for his ministry.  He is an
effective ferment of goodness, a slow transmuter of the earthly
into a more heavenly order.
[215]  The best missionary lives abound in the victorious
combination of non-resistance with personal authority.  John G. 
Paton, for example, in the New Hebrides, among brutish Melanesian
cannibals, preserves a charmed life by dint of it.  When it comes
to the point, no one ever dares actually to strike him.  Native
converts, inspired by him, showed analogous virtue.  “One of our
chiefs, full of the Christ-kindled desire to seek and to save,
sent a message to an inland chief, that he and four attendants
would come on Sabbath and tell them the gospel of Jehovah God. 
The reply came back sternly forbidding their visit, and
threatening with death any Christian that approached their
village.  Our chief sent in response a loving message, telling
them that Jehovah had taught the Christians to return good for
evil, and that they would come unarmed to tell them the story of
how the Son of God came into the world and died in order to bless
and save his enemies.  The heathen chief sent back a stern and
prompt reply once more:  ’If you come, you will be killed.’ On
Sabbath morn the Christian chief and his four companions were met
outside the village by the heathen chief, who implored and
threatened them once more. But the former said:–
“’We come to you without weapons of war! We come only to tell
you about Jesus.  We believe that He will protect us to-day.’
“As they pressed steadily forward towards the village, spears
began to be thrown at them.  Some they evaded, being all except
one dexterous warriors; and others they literally received with
their bare hands, and turned them aside in an incredible manner. 
The heathen, apparently thunderstruck at these men thus
approaching them without weapons of war, and not even flinging
back their own spears which they had caught, after having thrown
what the old chief called ’a shower of spears,’ desisted from
mere surprise.  Our Christian chief called out, as he and his
companions drew up in the midst of them on the village public
ground:–
“’Jehovah thus protects us.  He has given us all your spears!
Once we would have thrown them back at you and killed you.  But
now we come, not to fight but to tell you about Jesus.  He has
changed our dark hearts.  He asks you now to lay down all these
your other weapons of war, and to hear what we can tell you about
the love of God, our great Father, the only living God.’
“The heathen were perfectly overawed.  They manifestly looked on
these Christians as protected by some Invisible One.  They
listened for the first time to the story of the Gospel and of the
Cross.  We lived to see that chief and all his tribe sitting in
the school of Christ.  And there is perhaps not an island in
these southern seas, amongst all those won for Christ, where
similar acts of heroism on the part of converts cannot be
recited.”   John G. Paton, Missionary to the New Hebrides, An
Autobiography, second part, London, 1890, p. 243.
In this respect the Utopian dreams of social justice in which
many contemporary socialists and anarchists indulge are, in spite
of their impracticability and non-adaptation to present
environmental conditions, analogous to the saint’s belief in an
existent kingdom of heaven.  They help to break the edge of the
general reign of hardness and are slow leavens of a better order.
The next topic in order is Asceticism, which I fancy you are all
ready to consider without argument a virtue liable to
extravagance and excess.  The optimism and refinement of the
modern imagination has, as I have already said elsewhere, changed
the attitude of the church towards corporeal mortification, and a
Suso or a Saint Peter of Alcantara[216] appear to us to-day
rather in the light of tragic mountebanks than of sane men
inspiring us with respect.  If the inner dispositions are right,
we ask, what need of all this torment, this violation of the
outer nature?  It keeps the outer nature too important.  Any one
who is genuinely emancipated from the flesh will look on
pleasures and pains, abundance and privation, as alike irrelevant
and indifferent.  He can engage in actions and experience
enjoyments without fear of corruption or enslavement.  As the
Bhagavad-Gita says, only those need renounce worldly actions who
are still inwardly attached thereto.  If one be really unattached
to the fruits of action, one may mix in the world with
equanimity.  I quoted in a former lecture Saint Augustine’s
antinomian saying:  If you only love God enough, you may safely
follow all your inclinations.  “He needs no devotional
practices,” is one of Ramakrishna’s maxims, “whose heart is moved
to tears at the mere mention of the name of <354> Hari."[217] 
And the Buddha, in pointing out what he called “the middle way"
to his disciples, told them to abstain from both extremes,
excessive mortification being as unreal and unworthy as mere
desire and pleasure.  The only perfect life, he said, is that of
inner wisdom, which makes one thing as indifferent to us as
another, and thus leads to rest, to peace, and to Nirvana.[218]
[216] Saint Peter, Saint Teresa tells us in her autobiography
(French translation, p. 333), “had passed forty years without
ever sleeping more than an hour and a half a day.  Of all his
mortifications, this was the one that had cost him the most.  To
compass it, he kept always on his knees or on his feet.  The
little sleep he allowed nature to take was snatched in a sitting
posture, his head leaning against a piece of wood fixed in the
wall.  Even had he wished to lie down, it would have been
impossible, because his cell was only four feet and a half long. 
In the course of all these years he never raised his hood, no
matter what the ardor of the sun or the rain’s strength.  He
never put on a shoe.  He wore a garment of coarse sackcloth, with
nothing else upon his skin.  This garment was as scant as
possible, and over it a little cloak of the same stuff.  When the
cold was great he took off the cloak and opened for a while the
door and little window of his cell.  Then he closed them and
resumed the mantle–his way, as he told us, of warming himself,
and making his body feel a better temperature.  It was a frequent
thing with him to eat once only in three days; and when I
expressed my surprise, he said that it was very easy if one once
had acquired the habit.  One of his companions has assured me
that he has gone sometimes eight days without food. . . . His
poverty was extreme; and his mortification, even in his youth,
was such that he told me he had passed three years in a house of
his order without knowing any of the monks otherwise than by the
sound of their voice, for he never raised his eyes, and only
found his way about by following the others.  He showed this same
modesty on public highways.  He spent many years without ever
laying eyes upon a woman; but he confessed to me that at the age
he had reached it was indifferent to him whether he laid eyes on
them or not.  He was very old when I first came to know him, and
his body so attenuated that it seemed formed of nothing so much
as of so many roots of trees. With all this sanctity he was very
affable.  He never spoke unless he was questioned, but his
intellectual right-mindedness and grace gave to all his words an
irresistible charm.”
[217] F. Max Muller:  Ramakrishna, his Life and sayings, 1899, p.
180.
[218] Oldenberg:  Buddha; translated by W. Hoey, London, 1882, p.
127.
We find accordingly that as ascetic saints have grown older, and
directors of conscience more experienced, they usually have shown
a tendency to lay less stress on special bodily mortifications. 
Catholic teachers have always professed the rule that, since
health is needed for efficiency in God’s service, health must not
be sacrificed to mortification.  The general optimism and
healthy-mindedness of liberal Protestant circles to-day makes
mortification for mortification’s sake repugnant to us.  We can
no longer sympathize with cruel deities, and the notion that God
can take delight in the spectacle of sufferings self-inflicted in
his honor is abhorrent.  In consequence of all these motives you
probably are disposed, unless some special utility can be shown
in some individual’s discipline, to treat the general tendency to
asceticism as pathological.
Yet I believe that a more careful consideration of the whole
matter, distinguishing between the general good intention of
asceticism and the uselessness of some of the particular acts of
which it may be guilty, ought to rehabilitate it in our esteem. 
For in its spiritual meaning asceticism stands for nothing less
than for the essence of the twice-born philosophy.  It
symbolizes, lamely enough no doubt, but sincerely, the belief
that there is an element of real wrongness in this world, which
is neither to be ignored nor evaded, but which must be squarely
met and overcome by an appeal to the soul’s heroic resources, and
neutralized and cleansed away by suffering.  As against this
view, the ultra-optimistic form of the once-born philosophy
thinks we may treat evil by the method of ignoring.  Let a man
who, by fortunate health and circumstances, escapes the suffering
of any great amount of evil in his own person, also close his
eyes to it as it exists in the wider universe outside his private
experience, and he will be quit of it altogether, and can sail
through life happily on a healthy-minded basis.  But we saw in
our lectures on melancholy how precarious this attempt
necessarily is.  Moreover it is but for the individual; and
leaves the evil outside of him, unredeemed and unprovided for in
his philosophy.
No such attempt can be a GENERAL solution of the problem; and to
minds of sombre tinge, who naturally feel life as a tragic
mystery, such optimism is a shallow dodge or mean evasion.  It
accepts, in lieu of a real deliverance, what is a lucky personal
accident merely, a cranny to escape by. It leaves the general
world unhelped and still in the clutch of Satan.  The real
deliverance, the twice-born folk insist, must be of universal
application.  Pain and wrong and death must be fairly met and
overcome in higher excitement, or else their sting remains
essentially unbroken.  If one has ever taken the fact of the
prevalence of tragic death in this world’s history fairly into
his mind–freezing, drowning entombment alive, wild beasts, worse
men, and hideous diseases–he can with difficulty, it seems to
me, continue his own career of worldly prosperity without
suspecting that he may all the while not be really inside the
game, that he may lack the great initiation.
Well, this is exactly what asceticism thinks; and it voluntarily
takes the initiation.  Life is neither farce nor genteel comedy,
it says, but something we must sit at in mourning garments,
hoping its bitter taste will purge us of our folly. The wild and
the heroic are indeed such rooted parts of it that
healthy-mindedness pure and simple, with its sentimental
optimism, can hardly be regarded by any thinking man as a serious
solution.  Phrases of neatness, cosiness, and comfort can never
be an answer to the sphinx’s riddle.
In these remarks I am leaning only upon mankind’s common instinct
for reality, which in point of fact has always held the world to
be essentially a theatre for heroism.  In heroism, we feel,
life’s supreme mystery is hidden.  We tolerate no one who has no
capacity whatever for it in any direction.  On the other hand, no
matter what a man’s frailties otherwise may be, if he be willing
to risk death, and still more if he suffer it heroically, in the
service he has chosen, the fact consecrates him forever. 
Inferior to ourselves in this or that way, if yet we cling to
life, and he is able “to fling it away like a flower” as caring
nothing for it, we account him in the deepest way our born
superior.  Each of us in his own person feels that a high-hearted
indifference to life would expiate all his shortcomings.
The metaphysical mystery, thus recognized by common sense, that
he who feeds on death that feeds on men possesses life
supereminently and excellently, and meets best the secret demands
of the universe, is the truth of which asceticism has been the
faithful champion.  The folly of the cross, so inexplicable by
the intellect, has yet its indestructible vital meaning.
Representatively, then, and symbolically, and apart from the
vagaries into which the unenlightened intellect of former times
may have let it wander, asceticism must, I believe, be
acknowledged to go with the profounder way of handling the gift
of existence.  Naturalistic optimism is mere syllabub and
flattery and sponge-cake in comparison. The practical course of
action for us, as religious men, would therefore, it seems to me,
not be simply to turn our backs upon the ascetic impulse, as most
of us to-day turn them, but rather to discover some outlet for it
of which the fruits in the way of privation and hardship might be
objectively useful.  The older monastic asceticism occupied
itself with pathetic futilities, or terminated in the mere
egotism of the individual, increasing his own perfection.[219] 
But is it not possible for us to discard most of these older
forms of mortification, and yet find saner channels for the
heroism which inspired them?
[219] “The vanities of all others may die out, but the vanity of
a saint as regards his sainthood is hard indeed to wear away."
Ramakrishna his Life and Sayings, 1899, p. 172.
Does not, for example, the worship of material luxury and wealth,
which constitutes so large a portion of the “spirit” of our age,
make somewhat for effeminacy and unmanliness?  Is not the
exclusively sympathetic and facetious way in which most children
are brought up to-day–so different from the education of a
hundred years ago, especially in evangelical circles–in danger,
in spite of its many advantages, of developing a certain
trashiness of fibre?  Are there not hereabouts some points of
application for a renovated and revised ascetic discipline?
Many of you would recognize such dangers, but would point to
athletics, militarism, and individual and national enterprise and
adventure as the remedies.  These contemporary ideals are quite
as remarkable for the energy with which they make for heroic
standards of life, as contemporary religion is remarkable for the
way in which it neglects them.[220]  War and adventure assuredly
keep all who engage in them from treating themselves too
tenderly.  They demand such incredible efforts, depth beyond
depth of exertion, both in degree and in duration, that the whole
scale of motivation alters.  Discomfort and annoyance, hunger and
wet, pain and cold, squalor and filth, cease to have any
deterrent operation whatever.  Death turns into a commonplace
matter, and its usual power to check our action vanishes. With
the annulling of these customary inhibitions, ranges of new
energy are set free, and life seems cast upon a higher plane of
power.
[220] “When a church has to be run by oysters, ice-cream, and
fun,” I read in an American religious paper, “you may be sure
that it is running away from Christ.”  Such, if one may judge
by appearances, is the present plight of many of our churches.
The beauty of war in this respect is that it is so congruous with
ordinary human nature.  Ancestral evolution has made us all
potential warriors; so the most insignificant individual, when
thrown into an army in the field, is weaned from whatever excess
of tenderness toward his precious person he may bring with him,
and may easily develop into a monster of insensibility.
But when we compare the military type of self-severity with that
of the ascetic saint, we find a world-wide difference in all
their spiritual concomitants.
“’Live and let live,’” writes a clear-headed Austrian officer,
"is no device for an army.  Contempt for one’s own comrades, for
the troops of the enemy, and, above all, fierce contempt for
one’s own person, are what war demands of every one.  Far better
is it for an army to be too savage, too cruel, too barbarous,
than to possess too much sentimentality and human reasonableness.
If the soldier is to be good for anything as a soldier, he must
be exactly the opposite of a reasoning and thinking man.  The
measure of goodness in him is his possible use in war.  War, and
even peace, require of the soldier absolutely peculiar standards
of morality.  The recruit brings with him common moral notions,
of which he must seek immediately to get rid.  For him victory,
success, must be EVERYTHING.  The most barbaric tendencies in men
come to life again in war, and for war’s uses they are
incommensurably good."[221]
[221] C. V. B. K.:  Friedens-und Kriegs-moral der Heere.  Quoted
by Hamon:  Psychologie du Militaire professional, 1895, p. xli.
These words are of course literally true.  The immediate aim of
the soldier’s life is, as Moltke said, destruction, and nothing
but destruction; and whatever constructions wars result in are
remote and non-military.  Consequently the soldier cannot
train himself to be too feelingless to all those usual sympathies
and respects, whether for persons or for things, that make for
conservation.  Yet the fact remains that war is a school of
strenuous life and heroism; and, being in the line of aboriginal
instinct, is the only school that as yet is universally
available.  But when we gravely ask ourselves whether this
wholesale organization of irrationality and crime be our only
bulwark against effeminacy, we stand aghast at the thought, and
think more kindly of ascetic religion.  One hears of the
mechanical equivalent of heat.  What we now need to discover in
the social realm is the moral equivalent of war:  something
heroic that will speak to men as universally as war does, and yet
will be as compatible with their spiritual selves as war has
proved itself to be incompatible.  I have often thought that in
the old monkish poverty-worship, in spite of the pedantry which
infested it, there might be something like that moral equivalent
of war which we are seeking.  May not voluntarily accepted
poverty be “the strenuous life,” without the need of crushing
weaker peoples?
Poverty indeed IS the strenuous life–without brass bands or
uniforms or hysteric popular applause or lies or circumlocutions;
and when one sees the way in which wealth- getting enters as an
ideal into the very bone and marrow of our generation, one
wonders whether a revival of the belief that poverty is a worthy
religious vocation may not be “the transformation of military
courage,” and the spiritual reform which our time stands most in
need of.
Among us English-speaking peoples especially do the praises of
poverty need once more to be boldly sung.  We have grown
literally afraid to be poor.  We despise any one who elects to be
poor in order to simplify and save his inner life.  If he does
not join the general scramble and pant with the money-making
street, we deem him spiritless and lacking in ambition.  We have
lost the power even of imagining what the ancient idealization of
poverty could have meant:  the liberation from material
attachments, the unbribed soul, the manlier indifference, the
paying our way by what we are or do and not by what we have, the
right to fling away our life at any moment irresponsibly–the
more athletic trim, in short, the moral fighting shape.  When we
of the so-called better classes are scared as men were never
scared in history at material ugliness and hardship; when we put
off marriage until our house can be artistic, and quake at the
thought of having a child without a bank-account and doomed to
manual labor, it is time for thinking men to protest against so
unmanly and irreligious a state of opinion.
It is true that so far as wealth gives time for ideal ends and
exercise to ideal energies, wealth is better than poverty and
ought to be chosen.  But wealth does this in only a portion of
the actual cases.  Elsewhere the desire to gain wealth and the
fear to lose it are our chief breeders of cowardice and
propagators of corruption.  There are thousands of conjunctures
in which a wealth-bound man must be a slave, whilst a man for
whom poverty has no terrors becomes a freeman.  Think of the
strength which personal indifference to poverty would give us if
we were devoted to unpopular causes.  We need no longer hold our
tongues or fear to vote the revolutionary or reformatory ticket. 
Our stocks might fall, our hopes of promotion vanish, our
salaries stop, our club doors close in our faces; yet, while we
lived, we would imperturbably bear witness to the spirit, and our
example would help to set free our generation.  The cause would
need its funds, but we its servants would be potent in proportion
as we personally were contented with our poverty.
I recommend this matter to your serious pondering, for it is
certain that the prevalent fear of poverty among the educated
classes is the worst moral disease from which our civilization
suffers.
I have now said all that I can usefully say about the several
fruits of religion as they are manifested in saintly lives, so I
will make a brief review and pass to my more general conclusions.
Our question, you will remember, is as to whether religion stands
approved by its fruits, as these are exhibited in the saintly
type of character.  Single attributes of saintliness may, it is
true, be temperamental endowments, found in non-religious
individuals.  But the whole group of them forms a combination
which, as such, is religious, for it seems to flow from the sense
of the divine as from its psychological centre.  Whoever
possesses strongly this sense comes naturally to think that the
smallest details of this world derive infinite significance from
their relation to an unseen divine order.  The thought of this
order yields him a superior denomination of happiness, and a
steadfastness of soul with which no other can compare.  In social
relations his serviceability is exemplary; he abounds in impulses
to help. His help is inward as well as outward, for his sympathy
reaches souls as well as bodies, and kindles unsuspected
faculties therein.  Instead of placing happiness where common men
place it, in comfort, he places it in a higher kind of inner
excitement, which converts discomforts into sources of cheer and
annuls unhappiness.  So he turns his back upon no duty, however
thankless; and when we are in need of assistance, we can count
upon the saint lending his hand with more certainty than we can
count upon any other person.  Finally, his humble-mindedness and
his ascetic tendencies save him from the petty personal
pretensions which so obstruct our ordinary social intercourse,
and his purity gives us in him a clean man for a companion. 
Felicity, purity, charity, patience, self-severity–these are
splendid excellencies, and the saint of all men shows them in the
completest possible measure.
But, as we saw, all these things together do not make saints
infallible.  When their intellectual outlook is narrow, they fall
into all sorts of holy excesses, fanaticism or theopathic
absorption, self-torment, prudery, scrupulosity, gullibility, and
morbid inability to meet the world.  By the very intensity of his
fidelity to the paltry ideals with which an inferior intellect
may inspire him, a saint can be even more objectionable and
damnable than a superficial carnal man would be in the same
situation.  We must judge him not sentimentally only, and not in
isolation, but using our own intellectual standards, placing him
in his environment, and estimating his total function.
Now in the matter of intellectual standards, we must bear in mind
that it is unfair, where we find narrowness of mind, always to
impute it as a vice to the individual, for in religious and
theological matters he probably absorbs his narrowness from his
generation.  Moreover, we must not confound the essentials of
saintliness, which are those general passions of which I have
spoken, with its accidents, which are the special determinations
of these passions at any historical moment.  In these
determinations the saints will usually be loyal to the temporary
idols of their tribe.  Taking refuge in monasteries was as much
an idol of the tribe in the middle ages, as bearing a hand in the
world’s work is to-day.  Saint Francis or Saint Bernard, were
they living to-day, would undoubtedly be leading consecrated
lives of some sort, but quite as undoubtedly they would not lead
them in retirement.  Our animosity to special historic
manifestations must not lead us to give away the saintly impulses
in their essential nature to the tender mercies of inimical
critics.
The most inimical critic of the saintly impulses whom I know is
Nietzsche.  He contrasts them with the worldly passions as we
find these embodied in the predaceous military character,
altogether to the advantage of the latter.  Your born saint, it
must be confessed, has something about him which often makes the
gorge of a carnal man rise, so it will be worth while to consider
the contrast in question more fully.
Dislike of the saintly nature seems to be a negative result of
the biologically useful instinct of welcoming leadership, and
glorifying the chief of the tribe.  The chief is the potential,
if not the actual tyrant, the masterful, overpowering man of
prey.  We confess our inferiority and grovel before him.  We
quail under his glance, and are at the same time proud of owning
so dangerous a lord.  Such instinctive and submissive
hero-worship must have been indispensable in primeval tribal
life.  In the endless wars of those times, leaders were
absolutely needed for the tribe’s survival.  If there were any
tribes who owned no leaders, they can have left no issue to
narrate their doom.  The leaders always had good consciences, for
conscience in them coalesced with will, and those who looked on
their face were as much smitten with wonder at their freedom from
inner restraint as with awe at the energy of their outward
performances.
Compared with these beaked and taloned graspers of the world,
saints are herbivorous animals, tame and harmless barn-yard
poultry.  There are saints whose beard you may, if you ever care
to, pull with impunity.  Such a man excites no thrills of wonder
veiled in terror; his conscience is full of scruples and returns;
he stuns us neither by his inward freedom nor his outward power;
and unless he found within us an altogether different faculty of
admiration to appeal to, we should pass him by with contempt.
In point of fact, he does appeal to a different faculty.
Reenacted in human nature is the fable of the wind, the sun, and
the traveler.  The sexes embody the discrepancy.  The woman loves
the man the more admiringly the stormier he shows himself, and
the world deifies its rulers the more for being willful and
unaccountable.  But the woman in turn subjugates the man by the
mystery of gentleness in beauty, and the saint has always charmed
the world by something similar.  Mankind is susceptible and
suggestible in opposite directions, and the rivalry of influences
is unsleeping.  The saintly and the worldly ideal pursue their
feud in literature as much as in real life.
For Nietzsche the saint represents little but sneakingness and
slavishness.  He is the sophisticated invalid, the degenerate par
excellence, the man of insufficient vitality.  His prevalence
would put the human type in danger.
“The sick are the greatest danger for the well.  The weaker, not
the stronger, are the strong’s undoing.  It is not FEAR of our
fellow-man, which we should wish to see diminished; for fear
rouses those who are strong to become terrible in turn
themselves, and preserves the hard-earned and successful type of
humanity. What is to be dreaded by us more than any other doom is
not fear, but rather the great disgust, not fear, but rather the
great pity–disgust and pity for our human fellows. . . .  The
MORBID are our greatest peril–not the ’bad’ men, not the
predatory beings.  Those born wrong, the miscarried, the broken–
they it is, the WEAKEST who are undermining the vitality of the
race, poisoning our trust in life, and putting humanity in
question. Every look of them is a sigh–’Would I were something
other!  I am sick and tired of what I am.’  In this swamp-soil of
self-contempt, every poisonous weed flourishes, and all so small,
so secret, so dishonest, and so sweetly rotten.  Here swarm the
worms of sensitiveness and resentment, here the air smells odious
with secrecy, with what is not to be acknowledged; here is woven
endlessly the net of the meanest of conspiracies, the conspiracy
of those who suffer against those who succeed and are victorious;
here the very aspect of the victorious is hated–as if health,
success, strength, pride, and the sense of power were in
themselves things vicious, for which one ought eventually to make
bitter expiation.  Oh, how these people would themselves like to
inflict the expiation, how they thirst to be the hangmen!  And
all the while their duplicity never confesses their hatred to
be hatred."[222]
[222] Zur Genealogie der Moral, Dritte Abhandlung, Section 14.  I
have abridged, and in one place transposed, a sentence.
Poor Nietzsche’s antipathy is itself sickly enough, but we all
know what he means, and he expresses well the clash between the
two Ideals.  The carnivorous-minded “strong man,” the adult male
and cannibal, can see nothing but mouldiness and morbidness in
the saint’s gentleness and self-severity, and regards him with
pure loathing.  The whole feud revolves essentially upon two
pivots:  Shall the seen world or the unseen world be our chief
sphere of adaptation?  and must our means of adaptation in this
seen world be aggressiveness or non-resistance?
The debate is serious.  In some sense and to some degree both
worlds must be acknowledged and taken account of; and in the seen
world both aggressiveness and non-resistance are needful.  It is
a question of emphasis, of more or less.  Is the saint’s type or
the strong-man’s type the more ideal?
It has often been supposed, and even now, I think, it is supposed
by most persons, that there can be one intrinsically ideal type
of human character.  A certain kind of man, it is imagined, must
be the best man absolutely and apart from the utility of his
function, apart from economical considerations.  The saint’s
type, and the knight’s or gentleman’s type, have always been
rival claimants of this absolute ideality; and in the ideal of
military religious orders both types were in a manner blended. 
According to the empirical philosophy, however, all ideals are
matters of relation.  It would be absurd, for example, to ask for
a definition of “the ideal horse,” so long as dragging drays and
running races, bearing children, and jogging about with
tradesmen’s packages all remain as indispensable differentiations
of equine function.  You may take what you call a general
all-round animal as a compromise, but he will be inferior to any
horse of a more specialized type, in some one particular
direction. We must not forget this now when, in discussing
saintliness, we ask if it be an ideal type of manhood.  We must
test it by its economical relations.
I think that the method which Mr. Spencer uses in his Data of
Ethics will help to fix our opinion.  Ideality in conduct is
altogether a matter of adaptation.  A society where all were
invariably aggressive would destroy itself by inner friction, and
in a society where some are aggressive, others must be
non-resistant, if there is to be any kind of order. This is the
present constitution of society, and to the mixture we owe many
of our blessings.  But the aggressive members of society are
always tending to become bullies, robbers, and swindlers; and no
one believes that such a state of things as we now live in is the
millennium.  It is meanwhile quite possible to conceive an
imaginary society in which there should be no aggressiveness, but
only sympathy and fairness–any small community of true friends
now realizes such a society.  Abstractly considered, such a
society on a large scale would be the millennium, for every good
thing might be realized there with no expense of friction.  To
such a millennial society the saint would be entirely adapted. 
His peaceful modes of appeal would be efficacious over his
companions, and there would be no one extant to take advantage of
his non-resistance.  The saint is therefore abstractly a higher
type of man than the “strong man,” because he is adapted to the
highest society conceivable, whether that society ever be
concretely possible or not.  The strong man would immediately
tend by his presence to make that society deteriorate.  It would
become inferior in everything save in a certain kind of bellicose
excitement, dear to men as they now are.
But if we turn from the abstract question to the actual
situation, we find that the individual saint may be well or ill
adapted, according to particular circumstances.  There is, in
short, no absoluteness in the excellence of sainthood.  It must
be confessed that as far as this world goes, anyone who makes an
out-and-out saint of himself does so at his peril.  If he is not
a large enough man, he may appear more insignificant and
contemptible, for all his saintship, than if he had remained a
worldling.[223]  Accordingly religion has seldom been so
radically taken in our Western world that the devotee could not
mix it with some worldly temper. It has always found good men who
could follow most of its impulses, but who stopped short when it
came to non-resistance.  Christ himself was fierce upon occasion. 
Cromwells, Stonewall Jacksons, Gordons, show that Christians can
be strong men also.
[223] We all know DAFT saints, and they inspire a queer kind of
aversion. But in comparing saints with strong men we must choose
individuals on the same intellectual level.  The under-witted
strong man homologous in his sphere with the under-witted saint,
is the bully of the slums, the hooligan or rowdy.  Surely on this
level also the saint preserves a certain superiority.
How is success to be absolutely measured when there are so many
environments and so many ways of looking at the adaptation?  It
cannot be measured absolutely; the verdict will vary according to
the point of view adopted.  From the biological point of view
Saint Paul was a failure, because he was beheaded.  Yet he was
magnificently adapted to the larger environment of history; and
so far as any saint’s example is a leaven of righteousness in the
world, and draws it in the direction of more prevalent habits of
saintliness, he is a success, no matter what his immediate bad
fortune may be.  The greatest saints, the spiritual heroes whom
every one acknowledges, the Francises, Bernards, Luthers,
Loyolas, Wesleys, Channings, Moodys, Gratrys, the Phillips
Brookses, the Agnes Joneses, Margaret Hallahans, and Dora
Pattisons, are successes from the outset.  They show themselves,
and there is no question; every one perceives their strength and
stature.  Their sense of mystery in things, their passion, their
goodness, irradiate about them and enlarge their outlines while
they soften them.  They are like pictures with an atmosphere and
background; and, placed alongside of them, the strong men of this
world and no other seem as dry as sticks, as hard and crude as
blocks of stone or brick-bats.
In a general way, then, and “on the whole,"[224] our abandonment
of theological criteria, and our testing of religion by practical
common sense and the empirical method, leave it in possession of
its towering place in history.  Economically, the saintly group
of qualities is indispensable to the world’s welfare.  The great
saints are immediate successes; the smaller ones are at least
heralds and harbingers, and they may be leavens also, of a better
mundane order.  Let us be saints, then, if we can, whether or not
we succeed visibly and temporally.  But in our Father’s house are
many mansions, and each of us must discover for himself the kind
of religion and the amount of saintship which best comports with
what he believes to be his powers and feels to be his truest
mission and vocation.  There are no successes to be guaranteed
and no set orders to be given to individuals, so long as we
follow the methods of empirical philosophy.
[224] See above, p. 321.
This is my conclusion so far.  I know that on some of your minds
it leaves a feeling of wonder that such a method should have been
applied to such a subject, and this in spite of all those remarks
about empiricism which I made at the beginning of Lecture
XIII.[225] How, you say, can religion, which believes in two
worlds and an invisible order, be estimated by the adaptation of
its fruits to this world’s order alone?  It is its truth, not its
utility, you insist, upon which our verdict ought to depend.  If
religion is true, its fruits are good fruits, even though in this
world they should prove uniformly ill adapted and full of naught
but pathos.  It goes back, then, after all, to the question of
the truth of theology. The plot inevitably thickens upon us; we
cannot escape theoretical considerations.  I propose, then, that
to some degree we face the responsibility.  Religious persons
have often, though not uniformly, professed to see truth in a
special manner.  That manner is known as mysticism.  I will
consequently now proceed to treat at some length of mystical
phenomena, and after that, though more briefly, I will consider
religious philosophy.
[225] Above, pp. 321-327
Over and over again in these lectures I have raised points and
left them open and unfinished until we should have come to the
subject of Mysticism.  Some of you, I fear, may have smiled as
you noted my reiterated postponements.  But now the hour has come
when mysticism must be faced in good earnest, and those broken
threads wound up together.  One may say truly, I think, that
personal religious experience has its root and centre in mystical
states of consciousness; so for us, who in these lectures are
treating personal experience as the exclusive subject of our
study, such states of consciousness ought to form the vital
chapter from which the other chapters get their light.  Whether
my treatment of mystical states will shed more light or darkness,
I do not know, for my own constitution shuts me out from their
enjoyment almost entirely, and I can speak of them only at second
hand.  But though forced to look upon the subject so externally,
I will be as objective and receptive as I can; and I think I
shall at least succeed in convincing you of the reality of the
states in question, and of the paramount importance of their
function.
First of all, then, I ask, What does the expression “mystical
states of consciousness” mean?  How do we part off mystical
states from other states?
The words “mysticism” and “mystical” are often used as terms of
mere reproach, to throw at any opinion which we regard as vague
and vast and sentimental, and without a base in either facts or
logic.  For some writers a “mystic” is any person who believes in
thought-transference, or spirit-return.  Employed in this way the
word has little value:  there are too many less ambiguous
synonyms.  So, to keep it useful by restricting it, I will do
what I did in the case of the word “religion,” and simply propose
to you four marks which, when an experience has them, may justify
us in calling it mystical for the purpose of the present
lectures. In this way we shall save verbal disputation, and the
recriminations that generally go therewith.
1.  Ineffability.–The handiest of the marks by which I classify
a state of mind as mystical is negative.  The subject of it
immediately says that it defies expression, that no adequate
report of its contents can be given in words.  It follows from
this that its quality must be directly experienced; it cannot be
imparted or transferred to others.  In this peculiarity mystical
states are more like states of feeling than like states of
intellect.  No one can make clear to another who has never had a
certain feeling, in what the quality or worth of it consists. 
One must have musical ears to know the value of a symphony; one
must have been in love one’s self to understand a lover’s state
of mind.  Lacking the heart or ear, we cannot interpret the
musician or the lover justly, and are even likely to consider him
weak-minded or absurd. The mystic finds that most of us accord to
his experiences an equally incompetent treatment.
2.  Noetic quality.–Although so similar to states of feeling,
mystical states seem to those who experience them to be also
states of knowledge.  They are states of insight into depths of
truth unplumbed by the discursive intellect.  They are
illuminations, revelations, full of significance and importance,
all inarticulate though they remain; and as a rule they carry
with them a curious sense of authority for after-time.
These two characters will entitle any state to be called
mystical, in the sense in which I use the word.  Two other
qualities are less sharply marked, but are usually found. These
are:–
3.  Transiency.–Mystical states cannot be sustained for long. 
Except in rare instances, half an hour, or at most an hour or
two, seems to be the limit beyond which they fade into the light
of common day.  Often, when faded, their quality can but
imperfectly be reproduced in memory; but when they recur it is
recognized; and from one recurrence to another it is susceptible
of continuous development in what is felt as inner richness and
importance.
4.  Passivity.–Although the oncoming of mystical states may be
facilitated by preliminary voluntary operations, as by fixing the
attention, or going through certain bodily performances, or in
other ways which manuals of mysticism prescribe; yet when the
characteristic sort of consciousness once has set in, the mystic
feels as if his own will were in abeyance, and indeed sometimes
as if he were grasped and held by a superior power.  This latter
peculiarity connects mystical states with certain definite
phenomena of secondary or alternative personality, such as
prophetic speech, automatic writing, or the mediumistic trance. 
When these latter conditions are well pronounced, however, there
may be no recollection whatever of the phenomenon, and it may
have no significance for the subject’s usual inner life, to
which, as it were, it makes a mere interruption.  Mystical
states, strictly so-called, are never merely interruptive.  Some
memory of their content always remains, and a profound sense of
their importance.  They modify the inner life of the subject
between the times of their recurrence.  Sharp divisions in this
region are, however, difficult to make, and we find all sorts of
gradations and mixtures.
These four characteristics are sufficient to mark out a group of
states of consciousness peculiar enough to deserve a special name
and to call for careful study.  Let it then be called the
mystical group.
 
Our next step should be to gain acquaintance with some typical
examples.  Professional mystics at the height of their
development have often elaborately organized experiences and a
philosophy based thereupon.  But you remember what I said in my
first lecture:  phenomena are best understood when placed within
their series, studied in their germ and in their over-ripe decay,
and compared with their exaggerated and degenerated kindred.  The
range of mystical experience is very wide, much too wide for us
to cover in the time at our disposal.  Yet the method of serial
study is so essential for interpretation that if we really wish
to reach conclusions we must use it.  I will begin, therefore,
with phenomena which claim no special religious significance, and
end with those of which the religious pretensions are extreme.
The simplest rudiment of mystical experience would seem to be
that deepened sense of the significance of a maxim or formula
which occasionally sweeps over one. “I’ve heard that said all my
life,” we exclaim, “but I never realized its full meaning until
now.”  “When a fellow-monk,” said Luther, “one day repeated
the words of the Creed:  ’I believe in the forgiveness of sins,’
I saw the Scripture in an entirely new light; and straightway I
felt as if I were born anew.  It was as if I had found the door
of paradise thrown wide open."[226] This sense of deeper
significance is not confined to rational propositions.  Single
words,[227] and conjunctions of words, effects of light on land
and sea, odors and musical sounds, all bring it when the mind is
tuned aright.  Most of us can remember the strangely moving power
of passages in certain poems read when we were young, irrational
doorways as they were through which the mystery of fact, the
wildness and the pang of life, stole into our hearts and thrilled
them.  The words have now perhaps become mere polished surfaces
for us; but lyric poetry and music are alive and significant only
in proportion as they fetch these vague vistas of a life
continuous with our own, beckoning and inviting, yet ever eluding
our pursuit.  We are alive or dead to the eternal inner message
of the arts according as we have kept or lost this mystical
susceptibility.
[226] Newman’s Securus judicat orbis terrarum is another
instance.
[227] “Mesopotamia” is the stock comic instance.–An excellent
Old German lady, who had done some traveling in her day, used to
describe to me her Sehnsucht that she might yet visit
"Philadelphia,” whose wondrous name had always haunted her
imagination.  Of John Foster it is said that “single words (as
chalcedony), or the names of ancient heroes, had a mighty
fascination over him.  ’At any time the word hermit was enough to
transport him.’ The words woods and forests would produce the
most powerful emotion.”  Foster’s Life, by Ryland, New York,
1846, p. 3.
A more pronounced step forward on the mystical ladder is found in
an extremely frequent phenomenon, that sudden feeling, namely,
which sometimes sweeps over us, of having “been here before,” as
if at some indefinite past time, in just this place, with just
these people, we were already saying just these things.  As
Tennyson writes:
     “Moreover, something is or seems
      That touches me with mystic gleams,
      Like glimpses of forgotten dreams–

     “Of something felt, like something here;
      Of something done, I know not where;
      Such as no language may declare."[228]
[228] The Two Voices.  In a letter to Mr. B. P. Blood, Tennyson
reports of himself as follows:–
“I have never had any revelations through anaesthetics, but a
kind of waking trance–this for lack of a better word–I have
frequently had, quite up from boyhood, when I have been all
alone.  This has come upon me through repeating my own name to
myself silently, till all at once, as it were out of the
intensity of the consciousness of individuality, individuality
itself seemed to dissolve and fade away into boundless being, and
this not a confused state but the clearest, the surest of the
surest, utterly beyond words–where death was an almost laughable
impossibility–the loss of personality (if so it were) seeming no
extinction, but the only true life.  I am ashamed of my feeble
description.  Have I not said the state is utterly beyond words?”
Professor Tyndall, in a letter, recalls Tennyson saying of this
condition:  “By God Almighty! there is no delusion in the matter!
It is no nebulous ecstasy, but a state of transcendent wonder,
associated with absolute clearness of mind.”  Memoirs of Alfred
Tennyson, ii. 473.
Sir James Crichton-Browne has given the technical name of “dreamy
states” to these sudden invasions of vaguely reminiscent
consciousness.[229] They bring a sense of mystery and of the
metaphysical duality of things, and the feeling of an enlargement
of perception which seems imminent but which never completes
itself.  In Dr. Crichton-Browne’s opinion they connect themselves
with the perplexed and scared disturbances of self-consciousness
which occasionally precede epileptic attacks.  I think that this
learned alienist takes a rather absurdly alarmist view of an
intrinsically insignificant phenomenon.  He follows it along the
downward ladder, to insanity; our path pursues the upward ladder
chiefly.  The divergence shows how important it is to neglect no
part of a phenomenon’s connections, for we make it appear
admirable or dreadful according to the context by which we set it
off.
[229] The Lancet, July 6 and 13, 1895, reprinted as the Cavendish
Lecture, on Dreamy Mental States, London, Bailliere, 1895.  They
have been a good deal discussed of late by psychologists.  See,
for example, Bernard-Leroy:  L’Illusion de Fausse Reconnaissance,
Paris, 1898.
Somewhat deeper plunges into mystical consciousness are met with
in yet other dreamy states.  Such feelings as these which Charles
Kingsley describes are surely far from being uncommon, especially
in youth:–
“When I walk the fields, I am oppressed now and then with an
innate feeling that everything I see has a meaning, if I could
but understand it.  And this feeling of being surrounded with
truths which I cannot grasp amounts to indescribable awe
sometimes. . . .  Have you not felt that your real soul was
imperceptible to your mental vision, except in a few hallowed
moments?"[230]
[230] Charles Kingsley’s Life, i. 55, quoted by Inge:  Christian
Mysticism, London, 1899, p. 341.
A much more extreme state of mystical consciousness is described
by J. A. Symonds; and probably more persons than we suspect could
give parallels to it from their own experience.
“Suddenly,” writes Symonds, “at church, or in company, or when I
was reading, and always, I think, when my muscles were at rest, I
felt the approach of the mood.  Irresistibly it took possession
of my mind and will, lasted what seemed an eternity, and
disappeared in a series of rapid sensations which resembled the
awakening from anaesthetic influence.  One reason why I disliked
this kind of trance was that I could not describe it to myself. I
cannot even now find words to render it intelligible.  It
consisted in a gradual but swiftly progressive obliteration of
space, time, sensation, and the multitudinous factors of
experience which seem to qualify what we are pleased to call our
Self. In proportion as these conditions of ordinary consciousness
were subtracted, the sense of an underlying or essential
consciousness acquired intensity.  At last nothing remained but a
pure, absolute, abstract Self.  The universe became without form
and void of content.  But Self persisted, formidable in its vivid
keenness, feeling the most poignant doubt about reality, ready,
as it seemed, to find existence break as breaks a bubble round
about it.  And what then?  The apprehension of a coming
dissolution, the grim conviction that this state was the last
state of the conscious Self, the sense that I had followed the
last thread of being to the verge of the abyss, and had arrived
at demonstration of eternal Maya or illusion, stirred or seemed
to stir me up again.  The return to ordinary conditions of
sentient existence began by my first recovering the power of
touch, and then by the gradual though rapid influx of familiar
impressions and diurnal interests.  At last I felt myself once
more a human being; and though the riddle of what is meant by
life remained unsolved I was thankful for this return from the
abyss–this deliverance from so awful an initiation into the
mysteries of skepticism.
“This trance recurred with diminishing frequency until I reached
the age of twenty-eight.  It served to impress upon my growing
nature the phantasmal unreality of all the circumstances which
contribute to a merely phenomenal consciousness. Often have I
asked myself with anguish, on waking from that formless state of
denuded, keenly sentient being, Which is the unreality–the
trance of fiery, vacant, apprehensive, skeptical Self from which
I issue, or these surrounding phenomena and habits which veil
that inner Self and build a self of flesh-and- blood
conventionality?  Again, are men the factors of some dream, the
dream-like unsubstantiality of which they comprehend at such
eventful moments?  What would happen if the final stage of the
trance were reached?"[231]
[231] H. F. Brown:  J. A. Symonds. a Biography, London, 1895, pp.
29-31, abridged.
In a recital like this there is certainly something suggestive of
pathology.[232]  The next step into mystical states carries us
into a realm that public opinion and ethical philosophy have long
since branded as pathological, though private practice and
certain lyric strains of poetry seem still to bear witness to its
ideality.  I refer to the consciousness produced by intoxicants
and anaesthetics, especially by alcohol.  The sway of alcohol
over mankind is unquestionably due to its power to stimulate the
mystical faculties of human nature, usually crushed to earth by
the cold facts and dry criticisms of the sober hour.  Sobriety
diminishes, discriminates, and says no; drunkenness expands,
unites, and says yes.  It is in fact the great exciter of the YES
function in man.  It brings its votary from the chill periphery
of things to the radiant core.  It makes him for the moment one
with truth.  Not through mere perversity do men run after it.  To
the poor and the unlettered it stands in the place of symphony
concerts and of literature; and it is part of the deeper mystery
and tragedy of life that whiffs and gleams of something that we
immediately recognize as excellent should be vouchsafed to so
many of us only in the fleeting earlier phases of what in its
totality is so degrading a poisoning.  The drunken consciousness
is one bit of the mystic consciousness, and our total opinion of
it must find its place in our opinion of that larger whole.
[232] Crichton-Browne expressly says that Symonds’s “highest
nerve centres were in some degree enfeebled or damaged by these
dreamy mental states which afflicted him so grievously.”   
Symonds was, however, a perfect monster of many-sided cerebral
efficiency, and his critic gives no objective grounds whatever
for his strange opinion, save that Symonds complained
occasionally, as all susceptible and ambitious men complain, of
lassitude and uncertainty as to his life’s mission.
Nitrous oxide and ether, especially nitrous oxide, when
sufficiently diluted with air, stimulate the mystical
consciousness in an extraordinary degree.  Depth beyond depth of
truth seems revealed to the inhaler.  This truth fades out,
however, or escapes, at the moment of coming to; and if any words
remain over in which it seemed to clothe itself, they prove to be
the veriest nonsense.  Nevertheless, the sense of a profound
meaning having been there persists; and I know more than one
person who is persuaded that in the nitrous oxide trance we have
a genuine metaphysical revelation.
Some years ago I myself made some observations on this aspect of
nitrous oxide intoxication, and reported them in print.  One
conclusion was forced upon my mind at that time, and my
impression of its truth has ever since remained unshaken.  It is
that our normal waking consciousness, rational consciousness as
we call it, is but one special type of consciousness, whilst all
about it, parted from it by the filmiest of screens, there lie
potential forms of consciousness entirely different.  We may go
through life without suspecting their existence; but apply the
requisite stimulus, and at a touch they are there in all their
completeness, definite types of mentality which probably
somewhere have their field of application and adaptation.  No
account of the universe in its totality can be final which leaves
these other forms of consciousness quite disregarded.  How to
regard them is the question–for they are so discontinuous with
ordinary consciousness.  Yet they may determine attitudes though
they cannot furnish formulas, and open a region though they fail
to give a map. At any rate, they forbid a premature closing of
our
accounts with reality.  Looking back on my own experiences, they
all converge towards a kind of insight to which I cannot help
ascribing some metaphysical significance.  The keynote of it is
invariably a reconciliation.  It is as if the opposites of the
world, whose contradictoriness and conflict make all our
difficulties and troubles, were melted into unity.  Not only do
they, as contrasted species, belong to one and the same genus,
but one of the species, the nobler and better one, is itself the
genus, and so soaks up and absorbs its opposite into itself. 
This is a dark saying, I know, when thus expressed in terms of
common logic, but I cannot wholly escape from its authority. I
feel as if it must mean something, something like what the
hegelian philosophy means, if one could only lay hold of it more
clearly.  Those who have ears to hear, let them hear; to me the
living sense of its reality only comes in the artificial mystic
state of mind.[233]
[233] What reader of Hegel can doubt that that sense of a
perfected Being with all its otherness soaked up into itself,
which dominates his whole philosophy, must have come from the
prominence in his consciousness of mystical moods like this, in
most persons kept subliminal?  The notion is thoroughly
characteristic of the mystical level and the Aufgabe of making it
articulate was surely set to Hegel’s intellect by mystical
feeling.
I just now spoke of friends who believe in the anaesthetic
revelation.  For them too it is a monistic insight, in which the
OTHER in its various forms appears absorbed into the One.
“Into this pervading genius,” writes one of them, “we pass,
forgetting and forgotten, and thenceforth each is all, in God.
There is no higher, no deeper, no other, than the life in which
we are founded.  ’The One remains, the many change and pass;’ and
each and every one of us IS the One that remains. . . . This is
the ultimatum. . . .  As sure as being–whence is all our
care–so sure is content, beyond duplexity, antithesis, or
trouble, where I have triumphed in a solitude that God is not
above."[234]
[234] Benjamin Paul Blood:  The Anaesthetic Revelation and the
Gist of Philosophy, Amsterdam, N. Y., 1874, pp. 35, 36.  Mr.
Blood has made several attempts to adumbrate the anaesthetic
revelation, in pamphlets of rare literary distinction, privately
printed and distributed by himself at Amsterdam.  Xenos Clark, a
philosopher, who died young at Amherst in the ’80’s, much
lamented by those who knew him, was also impressed by the
revelation.  “In the first place,” he once wrote to me, “Mr.
Blood and I agree that the revelation is, if anything
non-emotional.  It is utterly flat.  It is, as Mr. Blood says,
’the one sole and sufficient insight why, or not why, but how,
the present is pushed on by the past, and sucked forward by the
vacuity of the future.  Its inevitableness defeats all attempts
at stopping or accounting for it.  It is all precedence and
presupposition, and questioning is in regard to it forever too
late.  It is an initiation of the past.’ The real secret would be
the formula by which the ’now’ keeps exfoliating out of itself,
yet never escapes.  What is it, indeed, that keeps existence
exfoliating?  The formal being of anything, the logical
definition of it, is static.  For mere logic every question
contains its own answer–we simply fill the hole with the dirt we
dug out.  Why are twice two four?  Because, in fact, four is
twice two.  Thus logic finds in life no propulsion, only a
momentum.  It goes because it is a-going. But the revelation
adds:  it goes because it is and WAS a-going.  You walk, as it
were, round yourself in the revelation.  Ordinary philosophy is
like a hound hunting his own tail.  The more he hunts the farther
he has to go, and his nose never catches up with his heels,
because it is forever ahead of them.  So the present is already a
foregone conclusion, and I am ever too late to understand it. 
But at the moment of recovery from anaesthesis, just then, BEFORE
STARTING ON LIFE, I catch, so to speak, a glimpse of my heels, a
glimpse of the eternal process just in the act of starting.  The
truth is that we travel on a journey that was accomplished before
we set out; and the real end of philosophy is accomplished, not
when we arrive at, but when we remain in, our destination (being
already there)–which may occur vicariously in this life when we
cease our intellectual questioning. That is why there is a smile
upon the face of the revelation, as we view it.  It tells us that
we are forever half a second too late– that’s all.  ’You could
kiss your own lips, and have all the fun to yourself,’ it says,
if you only knew the trick.  It would be perfectly easy if they
would just stay there till you got round to them. Why don’t you
manage it somehow?”
Dialectically minded readers of this farrago will at least
recognize the region of thought of which Mr. Clark writes, as
familiar.  In his latest pamphlet, “Tennyson’s Trances and the
Anaesthetic Revelation,” Mr. Blood describes its value for life
as follows:–
“The Anaesthetic Revelation is the Initiation of Man into the
Immemorial Mystery of the Open Secret of Being, revealed as the
Inevitable Vortex of Continuity.  Inevitable is the word.  Its
motive is inherent–it is what has to be.  It is not for any love
or hate, nor for joy nor sorrow, nor good nor ill.  End,
beginning, or purpose, it knows not of.
“It affords no particular of the multiplicity and variety of
things but it fills appreciation of the historical and the sacred
with a secular and intimately personal illumination of the nature
and motive of existence, which then seems reminiscent–as if it
should have appeared, or shall yet appear, to every participant
thereof.
“Although it is at first startling in its solemnity, it becomes
directly such a matter of course–so old-fashioned, and so akin
to proverbs that it inspires exultation rather than fear, and a
sense of safety, as identified with the aboriginal and the
universal.  But no words may express the imposing certainty of
the patient that he is realizing the primordial, Adamic surprise
of Life.
“Repetition of the experience finds it ever the same, and as if
it could not possibly be otherwise.  The subject resumes his
normal consciousness only to partially and fitfully remember its
occurrence, and to try to formulate its baffling import–with
only this consolatory afterthought:  that he has known the oldest
truth, and that he has done with human theories as to the origin,
meaning, or destiny of the race.  He is beyond instruction in
’spiritual things.’
“The lesson is one of central safety:  the Kingdom is within. 
All days are judgment days:  but there can be no climacteric
purpose of eternity, nor any scheme of the whole.  The astronomer
abridges the row of bewildering figures by increasing his unit of
measurement: so may we reduce the distracting multiplicity of
things to the unity for which each of us stands.
“This has been my moral sustenance since I have known of it.  In
my first printed mention of it I declared:  ’The world is no more
the alien terror that was taught me.  Spurning the cloud-grimed
and still sultry battlements whence so lately Jehovan thunders
boomed, my gray gull lifts her wing against the nightfall, and
takes the dim leagues with a fearless eye.’ And now, after
twenty-seven years of this experience, the wing is grayer, but
the eye is fearless still, while I renew and doubly emphasize
that declaration.  I know–as having known–the meaning of
Existence:  the sane centre of the universe– at once the wonder
and the assurance of the soul–for which the speech of reason has
as yet no name but the Anaesthetic Revelation.” –I have
considerably abridged the quotation.
This has the genuine religious mystic ring! I just now quoted J.
A. Symonds.  He also records a mystical experience with
chloroform, as follows:–
’After the choking and stifling had passed away, I seemed at
first in a state of utter blankness; then came flashes of intense
light, alternating with blackness, and with a keen vision of what
was going on in the room around me, but no sensation of touch. I
thought that I was near death; when, suddenly, my soul became
aware of God, who was manifestly dealing with me, handling me, so
to speak, in an intense personal present reality.  I felt him
streaming in like light upon me. . . .  I cannot describe the
ecstasy I felt.  Then, as I gradually awoke from the influence of
the anaesthetics, the old sense of my relation to the world began
to return, the new sense of my relation to God began to fade.  I
suddenly leapt to my feet on the chair where I was sitting, and
shrieked out, ’It is too horrible, it is too horrible, it is too
horrible,’ meaning that I could not bear this disillusionment.
Then I flung myself on the ground, and at last awoke covered with
blood, calling to the two surgeons (who were frightened), ’Why
did you not kill me?  Why would you not let me die?’ Only think
of it.  To have felt for that long dateless ecstasy of vision the
very God, in all purity and tenderness and truth and absolute
love, and then to find that I had after all had no revelation,
but that I had been tricked by the abnormal excitement of my
brain.
“Yet, this question remains, Is it possible that the inner sense
of reality which succeeded, when my flesh was dead to impressions
from without, to the ordinary sense of physical relations, was
not a delusion but an actual experience?  Is it possible that I,
in that moment, felt what some of the saints have said they
always felt, the undemonstrable but irrefragable certainty of
God?"[235]
[235] Op. cit., pp. 78-80, abridged.  I subjoin, also abridging
it, another interesting anaesthetic revelation communicated to me
in manuscript by a friend in England.  The subject, a gifted
woman, was taking ether for a surgical operation.
“I wondered if I was in a prison being tortured, and why I
remembered having heard it said that people ’learn through
suffering,’ and in view of what I was seeing, the inadequacy of
this saying struck me so much that I said, aloud, ’to suffer IS
to learn.’
“With that I became unconscious again, and my last dream
immediately preceded my real coming to.  It only lasted a few
seconds, and was most vivid and real to me, though it may not be
clear in words.
“A great Being or Power was traveling through the sky, his foot
was on a kind of lightning as a wheel is on a rail, it was his
pathway.  The lightning was made entirely of the spirits of
innumerable people close to one another, and I was one of them. 
He moved in a straight line, and each part of the streak or flash
came into its short conscious existence only that he might
travel.  I seemed to be directly under the foot of God, and I
thought he was grinding his own life up out of my pain.  Then I
saw that what he had been trying with all his might to do was to
CHANGE HIS COURSE, to BEND the line of lightning to which he was
tied, in the direction in which he wanted to go.  I felt my
flexibility and helplessness, and knew that he would succeed. He
bended me, turning his corner by means of my hurt, hurting me
more than I had ever been hurt in my life, and at the acutest
point of this, as he passed, I SAW.  I understood for a moment
things that I have now forgotten, things that no one could
remember while retaining sanity.  The angle was an obtuse angle,
and I remember thinking as I woke that had he made it a right or
acute angle, I should have both suffered and ’seen’ still more,
and should probably have died.
“He went on and I came to.  In that moment the whole of my life
passed before me, including each little meaningless piece of
distress, and I UNDERSTOOD them.  THIS was what it had all meant,
THIS was the piece of work it had all been contributing to do.  I
did not see God’s purpose, I only saw his intentness and his
entire relentlessness towards his means.  He thought no more of
me than a man thinks of hurting a cork when he is opening wine,
or hurting a cartridge when he is firing.  And yet, on waking, my
first feeling was, and it came with tears, ’Domine non sum
digna,’ for I had been lifted into a position for which I was too
small.  I realized that in that half hour under ether I had
served God more distinctly and purely than I had ever done in my
life before, or than I am capable of desiring to do.  I was the
means of his achieving and revealing something, I know not what
or to whom, and that, to the exact extent of my capacity for
suffering.
“While regaining consciousness, I wondered why, since I had gone
so deep, I had seen nothing of what the saints call the LOVE of
God, nothing but his relentlessness.  And then I heard an answer,
which I could only just catch, saying, ’Knowledge and Love are
One, and the MEASURE is suffering’–I give the words as they came
to me. With that I came finally to (into what seemed a dream
world compared with the reality of what I was leaving), and I saw
that what would be called the ’cause’ of my experience was a
slight operation under insufficient ether, in a bed pushed up
against a window, a common city window in a common city street. 
If I had to formulate a few of the things I then caught a glimpse
of, they would run somewhat as follows:–
“The eternal necessity of suffering and its eternal
vicariousness. The veiled and incommunicable nature of the worst
sufferings;–the passivity of genius, how it is essentially
instrumental and defenseless, moved, not moving, it must do what
it does;–the impossibility of discovery without its
price;–finally, the excess of what the suffering ’seer’ or
genius pays over what his generation gains.  (He seems like one
who sweats his life out to earn enough to save a district from
famine, and just as he staggers back, dying and satisfied,
bringing a lac of rupees to buy grain with, God lifts the lac
away, dropping ONE rupee, and says, ’That you may give them. 
That you have earned for them.  The rest is for ME.’) I perceived
also in a way never to be forgotten, the excess of what we see
over what we can demonstrate.
“And so on!–these things may seem to you delusions, or truisms;
but for me they are dark truths, and the power to put them into
even such words as these has been given me by an ether dream.”
With this we make connection with religious mysticism pure and
simple.  Symonds’s question takes us back to those examples which
you will remember my quoting in the lecture on the Reality of the
Unseen, of sudden realization of the immediate presence of God. 
The phenomenon in one shape or another is not uncommon.
“I know,” writes Mr. Trine, “an officer on our police force who
has told me that many times when off duty, and on his way home in
the evening, there comes to him such a vivid and vital
realization of his oneness with this Infinite Power, and this
Spirit of Infinite Peace so takes hold of and so fills him, that
it seems as if his feet could hardly keep to the pavement, so
buoyant and so exhilarated does he become by reason of this
inflowing tide."[236]
[236] In Tune with the Infinite, p. 137.
Certain aspects of nature seem to have a peculiar power of
awakening such mystical moods.[237] Most of the striking cases
which I have collected have occurred out of doors.  Literature
has commemorated this fact in many passages of great beauty–this
extract, for example, from Amiel’s Journal Intime:–
[237] The larger God may then swallow up the smaller one.  I take
this from Starbuck’s manuscript collection:–
“I never lost the consciousness of the presence of God until I
stood at the foot of the Horseshoe Falls, Niagara.  Then I lost
him in the immensity of what I saw.  I also lost myself, feeling
that I was an atom too small for the notice of Almighty God.”
I subjoin another similar case from Starbuck’s collection:–
“In that time the consciousness of God’s nearness came to me
sometimes.  I say God, to describe what is indescribable.  A
presence, I might say, yet that is too suggestive of personality,
and the moments of which I speak did not hold the consciousness
of a personality, but something in myself made me feel myself a
part of something bigger than I, that was controlling.  I felt
myself one with the grass, the trees, birds, insects, everything
in Nature.  I exulted in the mere fact of existence, of being a
part of it all–the drizzling rain, the shadows of the clouds,
the tree-trunks, and so on.  In the years following, such moments
continued to come, but I wanted them constantly.  I knew so well
the satisfaction of losing self in a perception of supreme power
and love, that I was unhappy because that perception was not
constant.” The cases quoted in my third lecture, pp. 65, 66, 69,
are still better ones of this type.  In her essay, The Loss of
Personality, in The Atlantic Monthly (vol. lxxxv. p. 195), Miss
Ethel D. Puffer explains that the vanishing of the sense of self,
and the feeling of immediate unity with the object, is due to the
disappearance, in these rapturous experiences, of the motor
adjustments which habitually intermediate between the constant
background of consciousness (which is the Self) and the object in
the foreground, whatever it may be.  I must refer the reader to
the highly instructive article, which seems to me to throw light
upon the psychological conditions, though it fails to account for
the rapture or the revelation-value of the experience in the
Subject’s eyes.
“Shall I ever again have any of those prodigious reveries which
sometimes came to me in former days?  One day, in youth, at
sunrise, sitting in the ruins of the castle of Faucigny; and
again in the mountains, under the noonday sun, above Lavey, lying
at the foot of a tree and visited by three butterflies; once more
at night upon the shingly shore of the Northern Ocean, my back
upon the sand and my vision ranging through the Milky Way;–such
grand and spacious, immortal, cosmogonic reveries, when one
reaches to the stars, when one owns the infinite!  Moments
divine, ecstatic hours; in which our thought flies from world to
world, pierces the great enigma, breathes with a respiration
broad, tranquil, and deep as the respiration of the ocean, serene
and limitless as the blue firmament; . . . instants of
irresistible intuition in which one feels one’s self great as the
universe, and calm as a god. . . .  What hours, what memories!
The vestiges they leave behind are enough to fill us with belief
and enthusiasm, as if they were visits of the Holy Ghost."[238]
[238] Op cit., i. 43-44
Here is a similar record from the memoirs of that interesting
German idealist, Malwida von Meysenbug:–
“I was alone upon the seashore as all these thoughts flowed over
me, liberating and reconciling; and now again, as once before in
distant days in the Alps of Dauphine, I was impelled to kneel
down, this time before the illimitable ocean, symbol of the
Infinite.  I felt that I prayed as I had never prayed before, and
knew now what prayer really is:  to return from the solitude of
individuation into the consciousness of unity with all that is,
to kneel down as one that passes away, and to rise up as one 
imperishable.  Earth, heaven, and sea resounded as in one vast
world-encircling harmony.  It was as if the chorus of all the
great who had ever lived were about me.  I felt myself one with
them, and it appeared as if I heard their greeting:  ’Thou too
belongest to the company of those who overcome.’"[239]
[239] Memoiren einer Idealistin, Ste Auflage, 1900, iii. 166. 
For years she had been unable to pray, owing to materialistic
belief.
The well known passage from Walt Whitman is a classical
expression of this sporadic type of mystical experience.
 “I believe in you, my Soul . . .  
Loaf with me on the grass, loose the stop from your throat;. . . 
Only the lull I like, the hum of your valved voice.  
I mind how once we lay, such a transparent summer morning.  
Swiftly arose and spread around me the peace and knowledge      
     that pass all the argument of the earth,  
And I know that the hand of God is the promise of my own,  
And I know that the spirit of God is the brother of my own,  
And that all the men ever born are also my brothers and the     
      women my sisters and lovers,  
And that a kelson of the creation is love."[240]
[240] Whitman in another place expresses in a quieter way what
was probably with him a chronic mystical perception:  “There is,"
he writes, “apart from mere intellect, in the make-up of every
superior human identity, a wondrous something that realizes
without argument, frequently without what is called education
(though I think it the goal and apex of all education deserving
the name), an intuition of the absolute balance, in time and
space, of the whole of this multifariousness this revel of fools,
and incredible make-believe and general unsettiedness, we call
THE WORLD; a soul-sight of that divine clue and unseen thread
which holds the whole congeries of things, all history and time,
and all events, however trivial, however momentous, like a
leashed dog in the hand of the hunter.  [Of] such soul-sight and
root-centre for the mind mere optimism explains only the
surface.”  Whitman charges it against Carlyle that he lacked this
perception.  Specimen Days and Collect, Philadelphia, 1882, p.
174.
I could easily give more instances, but one will suffice.  I take
it from the Autobiography of J. Trevor.[241]
[241] My Quest for God, London, 1897, pp. 268, 269, abridged.
“One brilliant Sunday morning, my wife and boys went to the
Unitarian Chapel in Macclesfield.  I felt it impossible to
accompany them–as though to leave the sunshine on the hills, and
go down there to the chapel, would be for the time an act of
spiritual suicide.  And I felt such need for new inspiration and
expansion in my life.  So, very reluctantly and sadly, I left my
wife and boys to go down into the town, while I went further up
into the hills with my stick and my dog.  In the loveliness of
the morning, and the beauty of the hills and valleys, I soon lost
my sense of sadness and regret.  For nearly an hour I walked
along the road to the ’Cat and Fiddle,’ and then returned.  On
the way back, suddenly, without warning, I felt that I was in
Heaven–an inward state of peace and joy and assurance
indescribably intense, accompanied with a sense of being bathed
in a warm glow of light, as though the external condition had
brought about the internal effect–a feeling of having passed
beyond the body, though the scene around me stood out more
clearly and as if nearer to me than before, by reason of the
illumination in the midst of which I seemed to be placed.  This
deep emotion lasted, though with decreasing strength, until I
reached home, and for some time after, only gradually passing
away.”
The writer adds that having had further experiences of a similar
sort, he now knows them well.
“The spiritual life,” he writes, “justifies itself to those who
live it; but what can we say to those who do not understand? 
This, at least, we can say, that it is a life whose experiences
are proved real to their possessor, because they remain with him
when brought closest into contact with the objective realities of
life. Dreams cannot stand this test.  We wake from them to find
that they are but dreams.  Wanderings of an overwrought brain do
not stand this test.  These highest experiences that I have had
of God’s presence have been rare and brief–flashes of
consciousness which have compelled me to exclaim with
surprise–God is HERE!–or conditions of exaltation and insight,
less intense, and only gradually passing away.  I have severely
questioned the worth of these moments.  To no soul have I named
them, lest I should be building my life and work on mere
phantasies of the brain.  But I find that, after every
questioning and test, they stand out to-day as the most real
experiences of my life, and experiences which have explained and
justified and unified all past experiences and all past growth. 
Indeed, their reality and their far-reaching significance are
ever becoming more clear and evident.  When they came, I was
living the fullest, strongest, sanest, deepest life.  I was not
seeking them.  What I was seeking, with resolute determination,
was to live more intensely my own life, as against what I knew
would be the adverse judgment of the world.  It was in the most
real seasons that the Real Presence came, and I was aware that I
was immersed in the infinite ocean of God."[242]
[242] Op. cit., pp. 256, 257, abridged.
Even the least mystical of you must by this time be convinced of
the existence of mystical moments as states of consciousness of
an entirely specific quality, and of the deep impression which
they make on those who have them.  A Canadian psychiatrist, Dr.
R. M. Bucke, gives to the more distinctly characterized of these
phenomena the name of cosmic consciousness.  “Cosmic
consciousness in its more striking instances is not,” Dr. Bucke
says, “simply an expansion or extension of the self-conscious
mind with which we are all familiar, but the superaddition of a
function as distinct from any possessed by the average man as
SELF-consciousness is distinct from any function possessed by one
of the higher animals.”
“The prime characteristic of cosmic consciousness is a
consciousness of the cosmos, that is, of the life and order of
the universe.  Along with the consciousness of the cosmos there
occurs an intellectual enlightenment which alone would place the
individual on a new plane of existence–would make him almost a
member of a new species.  To this is added a state of moral
exaltation, an indescribable feeling of elevation, elation, and
joyousness, and a quickening of the moral sense, which is fully
as striking, and more important than is the enhanced intellectual
power.  With these come what may be called a sense of
immortality, a consciousness of eternal life, not a conviction
that he shall have this, but the consciousness that he has it
already."[243]
[243] Cosmic Consciousness:  a study in the evolution of the
human Mind, Philadelphia, 1901, p. 2.
It was Dr. Bucke’s own experience of a typical onset of cosmic
consciousness in his own person which led him to investigate it
in others.  He has printed his conclusions In a highly
interesting volume, from which I take the following account of
what occurred to him:–
“I had spent the evening in a great city, with two friends,
reading and discussing poetry and philosophy.  We parted at
midnight.  I had a long drive in a hansom to my lodging.  My
mind, deeply under the influence of the ideas, images, and
emotions called up by the reading and talk, was calm and
peaceful.  I was in a state of quiet, almost passive enjoyment,
not actually thinking, but letting ideas, images, and emotions
flow of themselves, as it were, through my mind.  All at once,
without warning of any kind, I found myself wrapped in a
flame-colored cloud.  For an instant I thought of fire, an
immense conflagration somewhere close by in that great city; the
next, I knew that the fire was within myself.  Directly afterward
there came upon me a sense of exultation, of immense joyousness
accompanied or immediately followed by an intellectual
illumination impossible to describe.  Among other things, I did
not merely come to believe, but I saw that the universe is not
composed of dead matter, but is, on the contrary, a living
Presence; I became conscious in myself of eternal life.  It was
not a conviction that I would have eternal life, but a
consciousness that I possessed eternal life then; I saw that all
men are immortal; that the cosmic order is such that without any
peradventure all things work together for the good of each and
all; that the foundation principle of the world, of all the
worlds, is what we call love, and that the happiness of each and
all is in the long run <391> absolutely certain.  The vision
lasted a few seconds and was gone; but the memory of it and the
sense of the reality of what it taught has remained during the
quarter of a century which has since elapsed.  I knew that what
the vision showed was true.  I had attained to a point of view
from which I saw that it must be true.  That view, that
conviction, I may say that consciousness, has never, even during
periods of the deepest depression, been lost."[244]
[244] Loc. cit., pp. 7, 8.  My quotation follows the privately
printed pamphlet which preceded Dr. Bucke’s larger work, and
differs verbally a little from the text of the latter.
We have now seen enough of this cosmic or mystic consciousness,
as it comes sporadically.  We must next pass to its methodical
cultivation as an element of the religious life.  Hindus,
Buddhists, Mohammedans, and Christians all have cultivated it
methodically.
In India, training in mystical insight has been known from time
immemorial under the name of yoga.  Yoga means the experimental
union of the individual with the divine.  It is based on
persevering exercise; and the diet, posture, breathing,
intellectual concentration, and moral discipline vary slightly in
the different systems which teach it.  The yogi, or disciple, who
has by these means overcome the obscurations of his lower nature
sufficiently, enters into the condition termed samadhi, “and
comes face to face with facts which no instinct or reason can
ever know.”  He learns–
“That the mind itself has a higher state of existence, beyond
reason, a superconscious state, and that when the mind gets to
that higher state, then this knowledge beyond reasoning comes. .
. . All the different steps in yoga are intended to bring us
scientifically to the superconscious state or Samadhi. . . . 
Just as unconscious work is beneath consciousness, so there is
another work which is above consciousness, and which, also, is
not accompanied with the feeling of egoism . . . . There is no
feeling of I, and yet the mind works, desireless, free from
restlessness, objectless, bodiless.  Then the Truth shines in its
full effulgence, and we know ourselves–for Samadhi lies
potential in us all–for what we truly are, free, immortal,
omnipotent, loosed from the finite, and its contrasts of good and
evil altogether, and identical with the Atman or Universal
Soul."[245]
[245] My quotations are from Vivekananda, Raja Yoga, London,
1896.  The completest source of information on Yoga is the work
translated by Vihari Lala Mtra:  Yoga Vasishta Maha Ramayana. 4
vols.  Calcutta, 1891-99.
The Vedantists say that one may stumble into superconsciousness
sporadically, without the previous discipline, but it is then
impure.  Their test of its purity, like our test of religion’s
value, is empirical:  its fruits must be good for life. When a
man comes out of Samadhi, they assure us that he remains
"enlightened, a sage, a prophet, a saint, his whole character
changed, his life changed, illumined."[246]
[246] A European witness, after carefully comparing the results
of Yoga with those of the hypnotic or dreamy states artificially
producible by us, says:  “It makes of its true disciples good,
healthy, and happy men. . . . Through the mastery which the yogi
attains over his thoughts and his body, he grows into a
’character.’ By the subjection of his impulses and propensities
to his will, and the fixing of the latter upon the ideal of
goodness, he becomes a ’personality’ hard to influence by others,
and thus almost the opposite of what we usually imagine a medium
so-called, or psychic subject to be.  Karl Kellner:  Yoga:  Eine
Skizze, Munchen, 1896, p. 21.
The Buddhists used the word “samadhi” as well as the Hindus; but
"dhyana” is their special word for higher states of
contemplation.  There seem to be four stages recognized in
dhyana.  The first stage comes through concentration of the mind
upon one point.  It excludes desire, but not discernment or
judgment:  it is still intellectual.  In the second stage the
intellectual functions drop off, and the satisfied sense of unity
remains.  In the third stage the satisfaction departs, and
indifference begins, along with memory a self-consciousness.  In
the fourth stage the indifference, memory, and self-consciousness
are perfected.  [Just what “memory” and “self-consciousness” mean
in this connection is doubtful.  They cannot be the faculties
familiar to us in the lower life.] Higher stages still of
contemplation are mentioned–a region where there exists nothing,
and where the mediator says:  “There exists absolutely nothing,"
and stops. Then he reaches another region where he says:  “There
are neither ideas nor absence of ideas,” and stops again.  Then
another region where, “having reached the end of both idea and
perception, he stops finally.”  This would seem to be, not yet
Nirvana, but as close an approach to it as this life
affords.[247]
[247] I follow the account in C. F. Koeppen:  Die Religion des
Buddha, Berlin, 1857, i. 585 ff.
In the Mohammedan world the Sufi sect and various dervish bodies
are the possessors of the mystical tradition.  The Sufis have
existed in Persia from the earliest times, and as their pantheism
is so at variance with the hot and rigid monotheism of the Arab
mind, it has been suggested that Sufism must have been inoculated
into Islam by Hindu influences. We Christians know little of
Sufism, for its secrets are disclosed only to those initiated. 
To give its existence a certain liveliness in your minds, I will
quote a Moslem document, and pass away from the subject.
Al-Ghazzali, a Persian philosopher and theologian, who flourished
in the eleventh century, and ranks as one of the greatest doctors
of the Moslem church, has left us one of the few autobiographies
to be found outside of Christian literature.  Strange that a
species of book so abundant among ourselves should be so little
represented elsewhere–the absence of strictly personal
confessions is the chief difficulty to the purely literary
student who would like to become acquainted with the inwardness
of religions other than the Christian. M. Schmolders has
translated a part of Al-Ghazzali’s autobiography into
French:[248]–
[248] For a full account of him, see D. B. Macdonald:  The Life
Of Al-Ghazzali, in the Journal of the American Oriental Society,
1899, vol. xx., p. 71.
“The Science of the Sufis,” says the Moslem author, “aims at
detaching the heart from all that is not God, and at giving to it
for sole occupation the meditation of the divine being.  Theory
being more easy for me than practice, I read [certain books]
until I understood all that can be learned by study and hearsay.
Then I recognized that what pertains most exclusively to their
method is just what no study can grasp, but only transport,
ecstasy, and the transformation of the soul.  How great, for
example, is the difference between knowing the definitions of
health, of satiety, with their causes and conditions, and being
really healthy or filled.  How different to know in what
drunkenness consists–as being a state occasioned by a vapor that
rises from the stomach–and BEING drunk effectively.  Without
doubt, the drunken man knows neither the definition of
drunkenness nor what makes it interesting for science.  Being
drunk, he knows nothing; whilst the physician, although not drunk
knows well in what drunkenness consists, and what are its
predisposing conditions.  Similarly there is a difference between
knowing the nature of abstinence, and BEING abstinent or having
one’s soul detached from the world.–Thus I had learned what
words could teach of Sufism, but what was left could be learned
neither by study nor through the ears, but solely by giving one’s
self up to ecstasy and leading a pious life.
“Reflecting on my situation, I found myself tied down by a
multitude of bonds–temptations on every side.  Considering my
teaching, I found it was impure before God.  I saw myself
struggling with all my might to achieve glory and to spread my
name.  [Here follows an account of his six months’ hesitation to
break away from the conditions of his life at Bagdad, at the end
of which he fell ill with a paralysis of the tongue.] Then,
feeling my own weakness, and having entirely given up my own
will, I repaired to God like a man in distress who has no more
resources.  He answered, as he answers the wretch who invokes
him.  My heart no longer felt any difficulty in renouncing glory,
wealth, and my children.  So I quitted Bagdad, and reserving from
my fortune only what was indispensable for my subsistence, I
distributed the rest.  I went to Syria, where I remained about
two years, with no other occupation than living in retreat and
solitude, conquering my desires, combating my passions, training
myself to purify my soul, to make my character perfect, to
prepare my heart for meditating on God–all according to the
methods of the Sufis, as I had read of them.
“This retreat only increased my desire to live in solitude, and
to complete the purification of my heart and fit it for
meditation.  But the vicissitudes of the times, the affairs of
the family, the need of subsistence, changed in some respects my
primitive resolve, and interfered with my plans for a purely
solitary life.  I had never yet found myself completely in
ecstasy, save in a few single hours; nevertheless, I kept the
hope of attaining this state.  Every time that the accidents led
me astray, I sought to return; and in this situation I spent ten
years.  During this solitary state things were revealed to me
which it is impossible either to describe or to point out.  I
recognized for certain that the Sufis are assuredly walking in
the path of God.  Both in their acts and in their inaction,
whether internal or external, they are illumined by the light
which proceeds from the prophetic source.  The first condition
for a Sufi is to purge his heart entirely of all that is not God.
The next key of the contemplative life consists in the humble
prayers which escape from the fervent soul, and in the
meditations on God in which the heart is swallowed up entirely.
But in reality this is only the beginning of the Sufi life, the
end of Sufism being total absorption in God.  The intuitions and
all that precede are, so to speak, only the threshold for those
who enter.  From the beginning revelations take place in so
flagrant a shape that the Sufis see before them, whilst wide
awake, the angels and the souls of the prophets.  They hear their
voices and obtain their favors.  Then the transport rises from
the perception of forms and figures to a degree which escapes all
expression, and which no man may seek to give an account of
without his words involving sin.
 
"Whosoever has had no experience of the transport knows of the
true nature of prophetism nothing but the name.  He may meanwhile
be sure of its existence, both by experience and by what he hears
the Sufis say.  As there are men endowed only with the sensitive
faculty who reject what is offered them in the way of objects of
the pure understanding, so there are intellectual men who reject
and avoid the things perceived by the prophetic faculty.  A blind
man can understand nothing of colors save what he has learned by
narration and hearsay.  Yet God has brought prophetism near to
men in giving them all a state analogous to it in its principal
characters.  This state is sleep. If you were to tell a man who
was himself without experience of such a phenomenon that there
are people who at times swoon away so as to resemble dead men,
and who [in dreams] yet perceive things that are hidden, he would
deny it [and give his reasons].  Nevertheless, his arguments
would be refuted by actual experience.  Wherefore, just as the
understanding is a stage of human life in which an eye opens to
discern various intellectual objects uncomprehended by sensation;
just so in the prophetic the sight is illumined by a light which
uncovers hidden things and objects which the intellect fails to
reach.  The chief properties of prophetism are perceptible only
during the transport, by those who embrace the Sufi life.  The
prophet is endowed with qualities to which you possess nothing
analogous, and which consequently you cannot possibly understand.
How should you know their true nature, since one knows only what
one can comprehend?  But the transport which one attains by the
method of the Sufis is like an immediate perception, as if one
touched the objects with one’s hand."[249]
[249] A. Schmolders:  Essai sur les ecoles philosophiques chez
les Arabes, Paris, 1842, pp. 54-68, abridged.
This incommunicableness of the transport is the keynote of all
mysticism.  Mystical truth exists for the individual who has the
transport, but for no one else.  In this, as I have said, it
resembles the knowledge given to us in sensations more than that
given by conceptual thought.  Thought, with its remoteness and
abstractness, has often enough in the history of philosophy been
contrasted unfavorably with sensation.
It is a commonplace of metaphysics that God’s knowledge cannot be
discursive but must be intuitive, that is, must be constructed
more after the pattern of what in ourselves is called immediate
feeling, than after that of proposition and judgment.  But our
immediate feelings have no content but what the five senses
supply; and we have seen and shall see again that mystics may
emphatically deny that the senses play any part in the very
highest type of knowledge which their transports yield.
In the Christian church there have always been mystics. Although
many of them have been viewed with suspicion, some have gained
favor in the eyes of the authorities.  The experiences of these
have been treated as precedents, and a codified system of
mystical theology has been based upon them, in which everything
legitimate finds its place.[250] The basis of the system is
"orison” or meditation, the methodical elevation of the soul
towards God.  Through the practice of orison the higher levels of
mystical experience may be attained.  It is odd that
Protestantism, especially evangelical Protestantism, should
seemingly have abandoned everything methodical in this line. 
Apart from what prayer may lead to, Protestant mystical
experience appears to have been almost exclusively sporadic.  It
has been left to our mind- curers to reintroduce methodical
meditation into our religious life.
[250] Gorres’s Christliche Mystik gives a full account of the
facts.  So does Ribet’s Mystique Divine, 2 vols., Paris, 1890.  A
still more methodical modern work is the Mystica Theologia of
Vallgornera, 2 vols., Turin, 1890.
The first thing to be aimed at in orison is the mind’s detachment
from outer sensations, for these interfere with its concentration
upon ideal things.  Such manuals as Saint Ignatius’s Spiritual
Exercises recommend the disciple to <398> expel sensation by a
graduated series of efforts to imagine holy scenes.  The acme of
this kind of discipline would be a semi-hallucinatory
mono-ideism–an imaginary figure of Christ, for example, coming
fully to occupy the mind.  Sensorial images of this sort, whether
literal or symbolic, play an enormous part in mysticism.[251] 
But in certain cases imagery may fall away entirely, and in the
very highest raptures it tends to do so.  The state of
consciousness becomes then insusceptible of any verbal
description.  Mystical teachers are unanimous as to this. Saint
John of the Cross, for instance, one of the best of them,
thus describes the condition called the “union of love,” which,
he says, is reached by “dark contemplation.”  In this the Deity
compenetrates the soul, but in such a hidden way that the soul–
“finds no terms, no means, no comparison whereby to render the
sublimity of the wisdom and the delicacy of the spiritual feeling
with which she is filled. . . . We receive this mystical
knowledge of God clothed in none of the kinds of images, in none
of the sensible representations, which our mind makes use of in
other circumstances.  Accordingly in this knowledge, since the
senses and the imagination are not employed, we get neither form
nor impression, nor can we give any account or furnish any
likeness, although the mysterious and sweet-tasting wisdom comes
home so clearly to the inmost parts of our soul.  Fancy a man
seeing a certain kind of thing for the first time in his life. He
can understand it, use and enjoy it, but he cannot apply a name
to it, nor communicate any idea of it, even though all the while
it be a mere thing of sense.  How much greater will be his
powerlessness when it goes beyond the senses! This is the
peculiarity of the divine language.  The more infused, intimate,
spiritual, and supersensible it is, the more does it exceed the
senses, both inner and outer, and impose silence upon them. . . .
The soul then feels as if placed in a vast and profound solitude,
to which no created thing has access, in an immense and boundless
desert, desert the more delicious the more solitary it is. There,
in this abyss of wisdom, the soul grows by what it drinks in from
the well-springs of the comprehension of love, . . . and
recognizes, however sublime and learned may be the terms we
employ, how utterly vile, insignificant, and improper they are,
when we seek to discourse of divine things by their means."[252]
[251] M. ReCeJac, in a recent volume, makes them essential.
Mysticism he defines as “the tendency to draw near to the
Absolute morally AND BY THE AID OF SYMBOLS.”  See his Fondements
de la Connaissance mystique, Paris, 1897, p. 66.  But there are
unquestionably mystical conditions in which sensible symbols play
no part.
[252] Saint John of the Cross:  The Dark Night of the Soul, book
ii. ch. xvii., in Vie et Oeuvres, 3me edition, Paris, 1893, iii.
428-432. Chapter xi. of book ii. of Saint John’s Ascent of Carmel
is devoted to showing the harmfulness for the mystical life of
the use of sensible imagery.
I cannot pretend to detail to you the sundry stages of the
Christian mystical life.[253] Our time would not suffice, for one
thing; and moreover, I confess that the subdivisions and names
which we find in the Catholic books seem to me to represent
nothing objectively distinct.  So many men, so many minds:  I
imagine that these experiences can be as infinitely varied as are
the idiosyncrasies of individuals.
[253] In particular I omit mention of visual and auditory
hallucinations, verbal and graphic automatisms, and such marvels
as “levitation,” stigmatization, and the healing of disease. 
These phenomena, which mystics have often presented (or are
believed to have presented), have no essential mystical
significance, for they occur with no consciousness of
illumination whatever, when they occur, as they often do, in
persons of non-mystical mind.  Consciousness of illumination is
for us the essential mark of “mystical” states.
The cognitive aspects of them, their value in the way of
revelation, is what we are directly concerned with, and it is
easy to show by citation how strong an impression they leave of
being revelations of new depths of truth.  Saint Teresa is the
expert of experts in describing such conditions, so I will turn
immediately to what she says of one of the highest of them, the
"orison of union.”
“In the orison of union,” says Saint Teresa, “the soul is fully
awake as regards God, but wholly asleep as regards things of this
world and in respect of herself.  During the short time the union
lasts, she is as it were deprived of every feeling, and even if
she would, she could not think of any single thing.  Thus she
needs to employ no artifice in order to arrest the use of her
understanding:  it remains so stricken with inactivity that she
neither knows what she loves, nor in what manner she loves, nor
what she wills.  In short, she is utterly dead to the things of
the world and lives solely in God. . . .  I do not even know
whether in this state she has enough life left to breathe.  It
seems to me she has not; or at least that if she does breathe,
she is unaware of it.  Her intellect would fain understand
something of what is going on within her, but it has so little
force now that it can act in no way whatsoever.  So a person who
falls into a deep faint appears as if dead. . . .
“Thus does God, when he raises a soul to union with himself,
suspend the natural action of all her faculties.  She neither
sees, hears, nor understands, so long as she is united with God.
But this time is always short, and it seems even shorter than it
is.  God establishes himself in the interior of this soul in such
a way, that when she returns to herself, it is wholly impossible
for her to doubt that she has been in God, and God in her.  This
truth remains so strongly impressed on her that, even though many
years should pass without the condition returning, she can
neither forget the favor she received, nor doubt of its reality.
If you, nevertheless, ask how it is possible that the soul can
see and understand that she has been in God, since during the
union she has neither sight nor understanding, I reply that she
does not see it then, but that she sees it clearly later, after
she has returned to herself, not by any vision, but by a
certitude which abides with her and which God alone can give her.
I knew a person who was ignorant of the truth that God’s mode of
being in everything must be either by presence, by power, or by
essence, but who, after having received the grace of which I am
speaking, believed this truth in the most unshakable manner. So
much so that, having consulted a half-learned man who was as
ignorant on this point as she had been before she was
enlightened, when he replied that God is in us only by ’grace,’
she disbelieved his reply, so sure she was of the true answer;
and when she came to ask wiser doctors, they confirmed her in her
belief, which much consoled her. . . .
“But how, you will repeat, CAN one have such certainty in respect
to what one does not see?  This question, I am powerless to
answer.  These are secrets of God’s omnipotence which it does not
appertain to me to penetrate.  All that I know is that I tell the
truth; and I shall never believe that any soul who does not
possess this certainty has ever been really united to God."[254]
[254] The Interior Castle, Fifth Abode, Ch. i., in Oeuvres,
translated by BOUIX, iii. 421-424.
The kinds of truth communicable in mystical ways, whether these
be sensible or supersensible, are various.  Some of them relate
to this world–visions of the future, the reading of hearts, the
sudden understanding of texts, the knowledge of distant events,
for example; but the most important revelations are theological
or metaphysical.
“Saint Ignatius confessed one day to Father Laynez that a single
hour of meditation at Manresa had taught him more truths about
heavenly things than all the teachings of all the doctors put
together could have taught him. . . .  One day in orison, on the
steps of the choir of the Dominican church, he saw in a distinct
manner the plan of divine wisdom in the creation of the world. 
On another occasion, during a procession, his spirit was ravished
in God, and it was given him to contemplate, in a form and images
fitted to the weak understanding of a dweller on the earth, the
deep mystery of the holy Trinity.  This last vision flooded his
heart with such sweetness, that the mere memory of it in after
times made him shed abundant tears."[255]
[255] Bartoli-Michel:  vie de Saint Ignace de Loyola, i. 34-36.
Others have had illuminations about the created world, Jacob
Boehme for instance.  At the age of twenty-five he was
"surrounded by the divine light, and replenished with the
heavenly knowledge, insomuch as going abroad into the fields to a
green, at Gorlitz, he there sat down and viewing the herbs and
grass of the field, in his inward light he saw into their
essences, use, and properties, which was discovered to him by
their lineaments, figures, and signatures.”  Of a later
period of experience he writes:  “In one quarter of an hour I saw
and knew more than if I had been many years together at an
university.  For I saw and knew the being of all things, the Byss
and the Abyss, and the eternal generation of the holy Trinity,
the descent and original of the world and of all creatures
through the divine wisdom.  I knew and saw in myself all the
three worlds, the external and visible world being of a
procreation or extern birth from both the internal and spiritual
worlds; and I saw and knew the whole working essence, in the evil
and in the good, and the mutual original and existence, and
likewise how the fruitful bearing womb of eternity brought forth.
So that I did not only greatly wonder at it, but did also
exceedingly rejoice, albeit I could very hardly apprehend the
same in my external man and set it down with the pen.  For I had
a thorough view of the universe as in a chaos, wherein all things
are couched and wrapt up, but it was impossible for me to
explicate the same.”  Jacob Behmen’s Theosophic Philosophy, etc.,
by Edward Taylor, London, 1691, pp. 425, 427, abridged.  
So George Fox:  “I was come up to the state of Adam in which he
was before he fell.  The creation was opened to me; and it was
showed me, how all things had their names given to them,
according to their nature and virtue.  I was at a stand in my
mind, whether I should practice physic for the good of mankind,
seeing the nature and virtues of the creatures were so opened to
me by the Lord.”   Journal, Philadelphia, no date, p. 69. 
Contemporary “Clairvoyance” abounds in similar revelations. 
Andrew Jackson Davis’s cosmogonies, for example, or certain
experiences related in the delectable “Reminiscences and Memories
of Henry Thomas Butterworth,” Lebanon, Ohio, 1886.
Similarly with Saint Teresa.  “One day, being in orison,” she
writes, “it was granted me to perceive in one instant how all
things are seen and contained in God.  I did not perceive them in
their proper form, and nevertheless the view I had of them was of
a sovereign clearness, and has remained vividly impressed upon my
soul.  It is one of the most signal of all the graces which the
Lord has granted me. . . .  The view was so subtile and delicate
that the understanding cannot grasp it."[256]
[256] Vie, pp. 581, 582.
She goes on to tell how it was as if the Deity were an enormous
and sovereignly limpid diamond, in which all our actions were
contained in such a way that their full sinfulness appeared
evident as never before.  On another day, she relates, while she
was reciting the Athanasian Creed–
“Our Lord made me comprehend in what way it is that one God can
be in three persons.  He made me see it so clearly that I
remained as extremely surprised as I was comforted, . . . and
now, when I think of the holy Trinity, or hear It spoken of, I
understand how the three adorable Persons form only one God and I
experience an unspeakable happiness.”
On still another occasion, it was given to Saint Teresa to see
and understand in what wise the Mother of God had been assumed
into her place in Heaven.[257]
[257] Loc. cit., p. 574
The deliciousness of some of these states seems to be beyond
anything known in ordinary consciousness.  It evidently involves
organic sensibilities, for it is spoken of as something too
extreme to be borne, and as verging on bodily pain.[258]  But it
is too subtle and piercing a delight for ordinary words to
denote.  God’s touches, the wounds of his spear, references to
ebriety and to nuptial union have to figure in the phraseology by
which it is shadowed forth.  Intellect and senses both swoon away
in these highest states of ecstasy.  “If our understanding
comprehends,” says Saint Teresa, “it is in a mode which remains
unknown to it, and it can understand nothing of what it
comprehends.  For my own part, I do not believe that it does
comprehend, because, as I said, it does not understand itself to
do so.  I confess that it is all a mystery in which I am
lost."[259] In the condition called raptus or ravishment by
theologians, breathing and circulation are so depressed that it
is a question among the doctors whether the soul be or be not
temporarily dissevered from the body.  One must read Saint
Teresa’s descriptions and the very exact distinctions which she
makes, to persuade one’s self that one is dealing, not with
imaginary experiences, but with phenomena which, however rare,
follow perfectly definite psychological types.
[258] Saint Teresa discriminates between pain in which the body
has a part and pure spiritual pain (Interior Castle, 6th Abode,
ch. xi.).  As for the bodily part in these celestial joys, she
speaks of it as “penetrating to the marrow of the bones, whilst
earthly pleasures affect only the surface of the senses.  I
think,” she adds, “that this is a just description, and I cannot
make it better.”   Ibid., 5th Abode, ch. i.
[259] Vie, p. 198.
To the medical mind these ecstasies signify nothing but suggested
and imitated hypnoid states, on an intellectual basis of
superstition, and a corporeal one of degeneration and hysteria. 
Undoubtedly these pathological conditions have existed in many
and possibly in all the cases, but that fact tells us nothing
about the value for knowledge of the consciousness which they
induce.  To pass a spiritual judgment upon these states, we must
not content ourselves with superficial medical talk, but inquire
into their fruits for life.
Their fruits appear to have been various.  Stupefaction, for one
thing, seems not to have been altogether absent as a result. You
may remember the helplessness in the kitchen and schoolroom of
poor Margaret Mary Alacoque.  Many other ecstatics would have
perished but for the care taken of them by admiring followers. 
The “other-worldliness” encouraged by the mystical consciousness
makes this over-abstraction from practical life peculiarly liable
to befall mystics in whom the character is naturally passive and
the intellect feeble; but in natively strong minds and characters
we find quite opposite results.  The great Spanish mystics, who
carried the habit of ecstasy as far as it has often been carried,
appear for the most part to have shown indomitable spirit and
energy, and all the more so for the trances in which they
indulged.
Saint Ignatius was a mystic, but his mysticism made him assuredly
one of the most powerfully practical human engines that ever
lived.  Saint John of the Cross, writing of the intuitions and
"touches” by which God reaches the substance of the soul, tells
us that–
“They enrich it marvelously.  A single one of them may be
sufficient to abolish at a stroke certain imperfections of which
the soul during its whole life had vainly tried to rid itself,
and to leave it adorned with virtues and loaded with supernatural
gifts.  A single one of these intoxicating consolations may
reward it for all the labors undergone in its life–even were
they numberless.  Invested with an invincible courage, filled
with an impassioned desire to suffer for its God, the soul then
is seized with a strange torment–that of not being allowed to
suffer enough."[260]
[260] Oeuvres, ii. 320.
Saint Teresa is as emphatic, and much more detailed. You may
perhaps remember a passage I quoted from her in my first
lecture.[261] There are many similar pages in her autobiography. 
Where in literature is a more evidently veracious account of the
formation of a new centre of spiritual energy, than is given in
her description of the effects of certain ecstasies which in
departing leave the soul upon a higher level of emotional
excitement?
[261] Above, p. 22.
“Often, infirm and wrought upon with dreadful pains before the
ecstasy, the soul emerges from it full of health and admirably
disposed for action . . . as if God had willed that the body
itself, already obedient to the soul’s desires, should share in
the soul’s happiness. . . . The soul after such a favor is
animated with a degree of courage so great that if at that moment
its body should be torn to pieces for the cause of God, it would
feel nothing but the liveliest comfort.  Then it is that promises
and heroic resolutions spring up in profusion in us, soaring
desires, horror of the world, and the clear perception of our
proper nothingness. . . .  What empire is comparable to that of a
soul who, from this sublime summit to which God has raised her,
sees all the things of earth beneath her feet, and is captivated
by no one of them?  How ashamed she is of her former attachments!
How amazed at her blindness! What lively pity she feels for those
whom she recognizes still shrouded in the darkness! . . . She
groans at having ever been sensitive to points of honor, at the
illusion that made her ever see as honor what the world calls by
that name.  Now she sees in this name nothing more than an
immense lie of which the world remains a victim.  She discovers,
in the new light from above, that in genuine honor there is
nothing spurious, that to be faithful to this honor is to give
our respect to what deserves to be respected really, and to
consider as nothing, or as less than nothing, whatsoever perishes
and is not agreeable to God. . . . She laughs when she sees
grave persons, persons of orison, caring for points of honor for
which she now feels profoundest contempt.  It is suitable to the
dignity of their rank to act thus, they pretend, and it makes
them more useful to others.  But she knows that in despising the
dignity of their rank for the pure love of God they would do more
good in a single day than they would effect in ten years by
preserving it. . . . She laughs at herself that there should
ever have been a time in her life when she made any case of
money, when she ever desired it. . . .  Oh! if human beings might
only agree together to regard it as so much useless mud, what
harmony would then reign in the world! With what friendship we
would all treat each other if our interest in honor and in money
could but disappear from earth!  For my own part, I feel as if it
would be a remedy for all our ills."[262]
[262] Vie, pp. 229, 230, 231-233, 243.
Mystical conditions may, therefore, render the soul more
energetic in the lines which their inspiration favors.  But this
could be reckoned an advantage only in case the inspiration were
a true one.  If the inspiration were erroneous, the energy would
be all the more mistaken and misbegotten. So we stand once more
before that problem of truth which confronted us at the end of
the lectures on saintliness.  You will remember that we turned to
mysticism precisely to get some light on truth.  Do mystical
states establish the truth of those theological affections in
which the saintly life has its root?
In spite of their repudiation of articulate self-description,
mystical states in general assert a pretty distinct theoretic
drift.  It is possible to give the outcome of the majority of
them in terms that point in definite philosophical directions.
One of these directions is optimism, and the other is monism. We
pass into mystical states from out of ordinary consciousness as
from a less into a more, as from a smallness into a vastness, and
at the same time as from an unrest to a rest.  We feel them as
reconciling, unifying states.  They appeal to the yes-function
more than to the no-function in us. In them the unlimited absorbs
the limits and peacefully closes the account.  Their very denial
of every adjective you may propose as applicable to the ultimate
truth–He, the Self, the Atman, is to be described by “No! no!"
only, say the Upanishads[263]–though it seems on the surface to
be a no-function, is a denial made on behalf of a deeper yes.
Whoso calls the Absolute anything in particular, or says that it
is THIS, seems implicitly to shut it off from being THAT –it is
as if he lessened it.  So we deny the “this,” negating the
negation which it seems to us to imply, in the interests of the
higher affirmative attitude by which we are possessed. The
fountain-head of Christian mysticism is Dionysius the Areopagite.
He describes the absolute truth by negatives exclusively.
[263] Muller’s translation, part ii. p. 180.
“The cause of all things is neither soul nor intellect; nor has
it imagination, opinion, or reason, or intelligence; nor is it
reason or intelligence; nor is it spoken or thought.  It is
neither number, nor order, nor magnitude, nor littleness, nor
equality, nor inequality, nor similarity, nor dissimilarity.  It
neither stands, nor moves, nor rests. . . . It is neither
essence, nor eternity, nor time.  Even intellectual contact does
not belong to it.  It is neither science nor truth.  It is not
even royalty or wisdom; not one; not unity; not divinity or
goodness; nor even spirit as we know it,” etc., ad libitum.[264]
[264] T. Davidson’s translation, in Journal of Speculative
Philosophy, 1893, vol. xxii., p. 399.
But these qualifications are denied by Dionysius, not because the
truth falls short of them, but because it so infinitely excels
them.  It is above them.  It is SUPER-lucent, SUPER-splendent,
SUPER-essential, SUPER-sublime, SUPER EVERYTHING that can be
named.  Like Hegel in his logic, mystics journey towards the
positive pole of truth only by the “Methode der Absoluten
Negativitat."[265]
[265] “Deus propter excellentiam non immerito Nihil vocatur."
Scotus Erigena, quoted by Andrew Seth:  Two Lectures on Theism,
New York, 1897, p. 55.
Thus come the paradoxical expressions that so abound in mystical
writings.  As when Eckhart tells of the still desert of the
Godhead, “where never was seen difference, neither Father, Son,
nor Holy Ghost, where there is no one at home, yet where the
spark of the soul is more at peace than in itself."[266] As when
Boehme writes of the Primal Love, that “it may fitly be compared
to Nothing, for it is deeper than any Thing, and is as nothing
with respect to all things, forasmuch as it is not comprehensible
by any of them.  And because it is nothing respectively, it is
therefore free from all things, and is that only good, which a
man cannot express or utter what it is, there being nothing to
which it may be compared, to express it by."[267]  Or as when
Angelus Silesius sings:–
 “Gott ist ein lauter Nichts, ihn ruhrt kein Nun noch Hier;
  Je mehr du nach ihm greiffst, je mehr entwind er dir."[268]
[266] J. Royce:  Studies in Good and Evil, p. 282.
[267] Jacob Bellmen’s Dialogues on the Supersensual Life,
translated by Bernard Holland, London, 1901, p. 48.
[268] Cherubinischer Wandersmann, Strophe 25.
To this dialectical use, by the intellect, of negation as a mode
of passage towards a higher kind of affirmation, there is
correlated the subtlest of moral counterparts in the sphere of
the personal will.  Since denial of the finite self and its
wants, since asceticism of some sort, is found in religious
experience to be the only doorway to the larger and more blessed
life, this moral mystery intertwines and combines with the
intellectual mystery in all mystical writings.
“Love,” continues Behmen, is Nothing, for “when thou art gone
forth wholly from the Creature and from that which is visible,
and art become Nothing to all that is Nature and Creature, then
thou art in that eternal One, which is God himself, and then thou
shalt feel within thee the highest virtue of Love. . . . The
treasure of treasures for the soul is where she goeth out of the
Somewhat into that Nothing out of which all things may be made. 
The soul here saith, I HAVE NOTHING, for I am utterly stripped
and naked; I CAN DO NOTHING, for I have no manner of power, but
am as water poured out; I AM NOTHING, for all that I am is no
more than an image of Being, and only God is to me I AM; and so,
sitting down in my own Nothingness, I give glory to the eternal
Being, and WILL NOTHING of myself, that so God may will all in
me, being unto me my God and all things."[269]
[269] Op. cit., pp. 42, 74, abridged.
In Paul’s language, I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me. 
Only when I become as nothing can God enter in and no difference
between his life and mine remain outstanding.[270]
[270] From a French book I take this mystical expression of
happiness in God’s indwelling presence:–
“Jesus has come to take up his abode in my heart.  It is not so
much a habitation, an association, as a sort of fusion.  Oh, new
and blessed life! life which becomes each day more luminous. . .
. The wall before me, dark a few moments since, is splendid at
this hour because the sun shines on it.  Wherever its rays fall
they light up a conflagration of glory; the smallest speck of
glass sparkles, each grain of sand emits fire; even so there is a
royal song of triumph in my heart <410> because the Lord is
there.  My days succeed each other; yesterday a blue sky; to day
a clouded sun; a night filled with strange dreams; but as soon as
the eyes open, and I regain consciousness and seem to begin life
again, it is always the same figure before me, always the same
presence filling my heart. . . .  Formerly the day was dulled by
the absence of the Lord.  I used to wake invaded by all sorts of
sad impressions, and I did not find him on my path.  To-day he is
with me; and the light cloudiness which covers things is not an
obstacle to my communion with him.  I feel the pressure of his
hand, I feel something else which fills me with a serene joy;
shall I dare to speak it out?  Yes, for it is the true expression
of what I experience.  The Holy Spirit is not merely making me a
visit; it is no mere dazzling apparition which may from one
moment to another spread its wings and leave me in my night, it
is a permanent habitation.  He can depart only if he takes me
with him.  More than that; he is not other than myself:  he is
one with me.  It is not a juxtaposition, it is a penetration, a
profound modification of my nature, a new manner of my being.”   
Quoted from the MS. of an old man by Wilfred Monod: II Vit: 
six meditations sur le mystere chretien, pp. 280-283.
This overcoming of all the usual barriers between the individual
and the Absolute is the great mystic achievement.  In mystic
states we both become one with the Absolute and we become aware
of our oneness.  This is the everlasting and triumphant mystical
tradition, hardly altered by differences of clime or creed.  In
Hinduism, in Neoplatonism, in Sufism, in Christian mysticism, in
Whitmanism, we find the same recurring note, so that there is
about mystical utterances an eternal unanimity which ought to
make a critic stop and think, and which brings it about that the
mystical classics have, as has been said, neither birthday nor
native land.  Perpetually telling of the unity of man with God,
their speech antedates languages, and they do not grow old.[271]
[271] Compare M. Maeterlinck:  L’Ornement des Noces spirituelles
de Ruysbroeck, Bruxelles, 1891, Introduction, p. xix.
“That art Thou!” say the Upanishads, and the Vedantists add: 
"Not a part, not a mode of That, but identically That, that
absolute Spirit of the World.”  “As pure water poured into pure
water remains the same, thus, O Gautama, is the Self of
a thinker who knows.  Water in water, fire in fire, ether in
ether, no one can distinguish them:  likewise a man whose mind
has entered into the Self."[272]  “’Every man,’ says the Sufi
Gulshan-Raz, whose heart is no longer shaken by any doubt, knows
with certainty that there is no being save only One. . . .  In
his divine majesty the ME, and WE, the THOU, are not found, for
in the One there can be no distinction. Every being who is
annulled and entirely separated from himself, hears resound
outside of him this voice and this echo:  I AM GOD:  he has an
eternal way of existing, and is no longer subject to
death.’"[273]  In the vision of God, says Plotinus, “what sees is
not our reason, but something prior and superior to our reason. .
. .  He who thus sees does not properly see, does not distinguish
or imagine two things.  He changes, he ceases to be himself,
preserves nothing of himself.  Absorbed in God, he makes but one
with him, like a centre of a circle coinciding with another
centre."[274]  “Here,” writes Suso, “the spirit dies, and yet is
all alive in the marvels of the Godhead . . . and is lost in the
stillness of the glorious dazzling obscurity and of the naked
simple unity. It is in this modeless WHERE that the highest bliss
is to be found."[275]  “Ich bin so gross als Gott,” sings Angelus
Silesius again, “Er ist als ich so klein; Er kann nicht uber
mich, ich unter ihm nicht sein."[276]
[272] Upanishads, M. Muller’s translation, ii. 17, 334.
[273] Schmolders: Op. cit., p. 210.
[274] Enneads, Bouillier’s translation. Paris, 1861, iii.  561.
Compare pp. 473-477, and vol. i. p. 27.
[275] Autobiography, pp. 309, 310.
[276] Op. cit., Strophe 10.
In mystical literature such self-contradictory phrases as
"dazzling obscurity,” “whispering silence,” “teeming desert,” are
continually met with.  They prove that not conceptual speech, but
music rather, is the element through which we are best spoken to
by mystical truth.  Many mystical scriptures are indeed little
more than musical compositions.
“He who would hear the voice of Nada, ’the Soundless Sound,’ and
comprehend it, he has to learn the nature of Dharana. . . .  When
to himself his form appears unreal, as do on waking all the forms
he sees in dreams, when he has ceased to hear the many, he may
discern the ONE–the inner sound which kills the outer. . . . 
For then the soul will hear, and will remember.  And then to the
inner ear will speak THE VOICE OF THE SILENCE. . . .  And now thy
SELF is lost in SELF, THYSELF unto THYSELF, merged in that SELF
from which thou first didst radiate. .  .  . Behold! thou hast
become the Light, thou hast become the Sound, thou art thy Master
and thy God.  Thou art THYSELF the object of thy search:  the
VOICE unbroken, that resounds throughout eternities, exempt from
change, from sin exempt, the seven sounds in one, the VOICE OF
THE SILENCE.  Om tat Sat."[277]
[277] H. P. Blavatsky:  The voice of the Silence.
These words, if they do not awaken laughter as you receive them,
probably stir chords within you which music and language touch in
common.  Music gives us ontological messages which non-musical
criticism is unable to contradict, though it may laugh at our
foolishness in minding them.  There is a verge of the mind which
these things haunt; and whispers therefrom mingle with the
operations of our understanding, even as the waters of the
infinite ocean send their waves to break among the pebbles that
lie upon our shores.
 “Here begins the sea that ends not till the world’s end.  Where 
     we stand,  
Could we know the next high sea-mark set beyond these waves     
     that gleam,
 We should know what never man hath known, nor eye of man     
     hath scanned. . . .  
Ah, but here man’s heart leaps, yearning towards the gloom     
   with venturous glee, 
From the shore that hath no shore beyond it, set in all the     
    sea."[278]
[278] Swinburne:  On the Verge, in “A Midsummer vacation.”
That doctrine, for example, that eternity is timeless, that our
"immortality,” if we live in the eternal, is not so much future
as already now and here, which we find so often expressed to-day
in certain philosophic circles, finds its support in a “hear,
hear!” or an “amen,” which floats up from that mysteriously
deeper level.[279]  We recognize the passwords to the mystical
region as we hear them, but we cannot use them ourselves; it
alone has the keeping of “the password primeval."[280]
[279] Compare the extracts from Dr. Bucke, quoted on pp. 398,
399.
[280] As serious an attempt as I know to mediate between the
mystical region and the discursive life is contained in an
article on Aristotle’s Unmoved Mover, by F. C. S. Schiller, in
Mind, vol. ix., 1900.
I have now sketched with extreme brevity and insufficiency, but
as fairly as I am able in the time allowed, the general traits of
the mystic range of consciousness.  It is on the whole
pantheistic and optimistic, or at least the opposite of
pessimistic.  It is anti-naturalistic, and harmonizes best with
twice-bornness and so-called other-worldly states mind.
My next task is to inquire whether we can invoke it as
authoritative.  Does it furnish any WARRANT FOR THE TRUTH of the
twice-bornness and supernaturality and pantheism which it favors?
I must give my answer to this question as concisely as I can.  In
brief my answer is this–and I will divide it into three parts:–
(1) Mystical states, when well developed, usually are, and have
the right to be, absolutely authoritative over the individuals to
whom they come.
(2) No authority emanates from them which should make it a duty
for those who stand outside of them to accept their revelations
uncritically.
(3) They break down the authority of the non-mystical or
rationalistic consciousness, based upon the understanding and the
senses alone.  They show it to be only one kind of consciousness.
They open out the possibility of other orders of truth, in which,
so far as anything in us vitally responds to them, we may freely
continue to have faith.
I will take up these points one by one.
               1.
As a matter of psychological fact, mystical states of a
well-pronounced and emphatic sort ARE usually authoritative over
those who have them.[281] They have been “there,” and know.  It
is vain for rationalism to grumble about this. If the mystical
truth that comes to a man proves to be a force that he can live
by, what mandate have we of the majority to order him to live in
another way?  We can throw him into a prison or a madhouse, but
we cannot change his mind–we commonly attach it only the more
stubbornly to its beliefs.[282] It mocks our utmost efforts, as a
matter of fact, and in point of logic it absolutely escapes our
jurisdiction.  Our own more “rational” beliefs are based on
evidence exactly similar in nature to that which mystics quote
for theirs.  Our senses, namely, have assured us of certain
states of fact; but mystical experiences are as direct
perceptions of fact for those who have them as any sensations
ever were for us.  The records show that even though the five
senses be in abeyance in them, they are absolutely sensational in
their epistemological quality, if I may be pardoned the barbarous
expression–that is, they are face to face presentations of what
seems immediately to exist. [281] I abstract from weaker states,
and from those cases of which the books are full, where the
director (but usually not the subject) remains in doubt whether
the experience may not have proceeded from the demon.
[282] Example:  Mr. John Nelson writes of his imprisonment for
preaching Methodism:  “My soul was as a watered garden, and I
could sing praises to God all day long; for he turned my
captivity into joy, and gave me to rest as well on the boards, as
if I had been on a bed of down.  Now could I say, ’God’s service
is perfect freedom,’ and I was carried out much in prayer that my
enemies might drink of the same river of peace which my God gave
so largely to me.”  Journal, London, no date, p. 172.
The mystic is, in short, INVULNERABLE, and must be left, whether
we relish it or not, in undisturbed enjoyment of his creed. 
Faith, says Tolstoy, is that by which men live. And faith-state
and mystic state are practically convertible terms.
               2.
But I now proceed to add that mystics have no right to claim that
we ought to accept the deliverance of their peculiar experiences,
if we are ourselves outsiders and feel no private call thereto. 
The utmost they can ever ask of us in this life is to admit that
they establish a presumption.  They form a consensus and have an
unequivocal outcome; and it would be odd, mystics might say, if
such a unanimous type of experience should prove to be altogether
wrong.  At bottom, however, this would only be an appeal to
numbers, like the appeal of rationalism the other way; and the
appeal to numbers has no logical force.  If we acknowledge it, it
is for “suggestive,” not for logical reasons:  we follow the
majority because to do so suits our life.
But even this presumption from the unanimity of mystics is far
from being strong.  In characterizing mystic states an
pantheistic, optimistic, etc., I am afraid I over-simplified the
truth.  I did so for expository reasons, and to keep the closer
to the classic mystical tradition.  The classic religious
mysticism, it now must be confessed, is only a “privileged case.”
  
It is an EXTRACT, kept true to type by the selection of the
fittest specimens and their preservation in “schools.” It is
carved out from a much larger mass; and if we take the larger
mass as seriously as religious mysticism has historically taken
itself, we find that the supposed unanimity largely disappears. 
To begin with, even religious mysticism itself, the kind that
accumulates traditions and makes schools, is much less unanimous
than I have allowed.  It has been both ascetic and antinomianly
self-indulgent within the Christian church.[283] It is dualistic
in Sankhya, and monistic in Vedanta philosophy.  I called it
pantheistic; but the great Spanish mystics are anything but
pantheists.  They are with few exceptions non-metaphysical minds,
for whom “the category of personality” is absolute.  The “union"
of man with God is for them much more like an occasional miracle
than like an original identity.[284]  How different again, apart
from the happiness common to all, is the mysticism of Walt
Whitman, Edward Carpenter, Richard Jefferies, and other
naturalistic pantheists, from the more distinctively Christian
sort.[285]  The fact is that the mystical feeling of enlargement,
union, and emancipation has no specific intellectual content
whatever of its own.  It is capable of forming matrimonial
alliances with material furnished by the most diverse
philosophies and theologies, provided only they can find a place
in their framework for its peculiar emotional mood.  We have no
right, therefore, to invoke its prestige as distinctively in
favor of any special belief, such as that in absolute idealism,
or in the absolute monistic identity, or in the absolute
goodness, of the world.  It is only relatively in favor of all
these things–it passes out of common human consciousness in the
direction in which they lie.
[283] Ruysbroeck, in the work which Maeterlinck has translated,
has a chapter against the antinomianism of disciples.  H.
Delacroix’s book (Essai sur le mysticisme speculatif en Allemagne
au XIVme Siecle, Paris, 1900) is full of antinomian material.
compare also A. Jundt:  Les Amis de Dieu au XIV Siecle, These de
Strasbourg, 1879.
[284] Compare Paul Rousselot:  Les Mystiques Espagnols, Paris,
1869, ch. xii.
[285] see Carpenter’s Towards Democracy, especially the latter
parts, and Jefferies’s wonderful and splendid mystic rhapsody,
The Story of my Heart.
So much for religious mysticism proper.  But more remains to be
told, for religious mysticism is only one half of mysticism.  The
other half has no accumulated traditions except those which the
text-books on insanity supply.  Open any one of these, and you
will find abundant cases in which “mystical ideas” are cited as
characteristic symptoms of enfeebled or deluded states of mind. 
In delusional insanity, paranoia, as they sometimes call it, we
may have a DIABOLICAL mysticism, a sort of religious mysticism
turned upside down. The same sense of ineffable importance in the
smallest events, the same texts and words coming with new
meanings, the same voices and visions and leadings and missions,
the same controlling by extraneous powers; only this time the
emotion is pessimistic:  instead of consolations we have
desolations; the meanings are dreadful; and the powers are
enemies to life.  It is evident that from the point of view of
their psychological mechanism, the classic mysticism and these
lower mysticisms spring from the same mental level, from that
great subliminal or transmarginal region of which science is
beginning to admit the existence, but of which so little is
really known.  That region contains every kind of matter: 
"seraph and snake” abide there side by side.  To come from thence
is no infallible credential.  What comes must be sifted and
tested, and run the gauntlet of confrontation with the total
context of experience, just like what comes from the outer world
of sense.  Its value must be ascertained by empirical methods, so
long as we are not mystics ourselves.
Once more, then, I repeat that non-mystics are under no
obligation to acknowledge in mystical states a superior authority
conferred on them by their intrinsic nature.[286]
[286] In chapter i. of book ii. of his work Degeneration, “Max
Nordau” seeks to undermine all mysticism by exposing the weakness
of the lower kinds.  Mysticism for him means any sudden
perception of hidden significance in things.  He explains such
perception by the abundant uncompleted associations which
experiences may arouse in a degenerate brain.  These give to him
who has the experience a vague and vast sense of its leading
further, yet they awaken no definite or useful consequent in his
thought.  The explanation is a plausible one for certain sorts of
feeling of significance, and other alienists (Wernicke, for
example, in his Grundriss der Psychiatrie, Theil ii., Leipzig,
1896) have explained “paranoiac” conditions by a laming of the
association-organ.  But the higher mystical flights, with their
positiveness and abruptness, are surely products of no such
merely negative condition.  It seems far more reasonable to
ascribe them to inroads from the subconscious life, of the
cerebral activity correlative to which we as yet know nothing.
               3.
Yet, I repeat once more, the existence of mystical states
absolutely overthrows the pretension of non-mystical states to be
the sole and ultimate dictators of what we may believe. As a
rule, mystical states merely add a supersensuous meaning to the
ordinary outward data of consciousness.  They are excitements
like the emotions of love or ambition, gifts to our spirit by
means of which facts already objectively before us fall into a
new expressiveness and make a new connection with our active
life.  They do not contradict these facts as such, or deny
anything that our senses have immediately seized.[287] It is the
rationalistic critic rather who plays the part of denier in the
controversy, and his denials have no strength, for there never
can be a state of facts to which new meaning may not truthfully
be added, provided the mind ascend to a more enveloping point of
view.  It must always remain an open question whether mystical
states may not possibly be such superior points of view, windows
through which the mind looks out upon a more extensive and
inclusive world.  The difference of the views seen from the
different mystical windows need not prevent us from entertaining
this supposition.  The wider world would in that case prove to
have a mixed constitution like that of this world, that is all. 
It would have its celestial and its infernal regions, its
tempting and its saving moments, its valid experiences and its
counterfeit ones, just as our world has them; but it would be a
wider world all the same.  We should have to use its experiences
by selecting and subordinating and substituting just as is our
custom in this ordinary naturalistic world; we should be liable
to error just as we are now; yet the counting in of that wider
world of meanings, and the serious dealing with it, might, in
spite of all the perplexity, be indispensable stages in our
approach to the final fullness of the truth. 
[287] They sometimes add subjective audita et visa to the facts,
but as these are usually interpreted as transmundane, they oblige
no alteration in the facts of sense.
In this shape, I think, we have to leave the subject.  Mystical
states indeed wield no authority due simply to their being
mystical states.  But the higher ones among them point in
directions to which the religious sentiments even of non-
mystical men incline.  They tell of the supremacy of the ideal,
of vastness, of union, of safety, and of rest.  They offer us
HYPOTHESES, hypotheses which we may voluntarily ignore, but which
as thinkers we cannot possibly upset.  The supernaturalism and
optimism to which they would persuade us may, interpreted in one
way or another, be after all the truest of insights into the
meaning of this life.
“Oh, the little more, and how much it is; and the little less,
and what worlds away!”  It may be that possibility and permission
of this sort are all that are religious consciousness requires to
live on.  In my last lecture I shall have to try to persuade you
that this is the case.  Meanwhile, however, I am sure that for
many of my readers this diet is too slender. If supernaturalism
and inner union with the divine are true, you think, then not so
much permission, as compulsion to believe, ought to be found. 
Philosophy has always professed to prove religious truth by
coercive argument; and the construction of philosophies of this
kind has always been one favorite function of the religious life,
if we use this term in the large historic sense.  But religious
philosophy is an enormous subject, and in my next lecture I can
only give that brief glance at it which my limits will allow.
The subject of Saintliness left us face to face with the
question, Is the sense of divine presence a sense of anything
objectively true?  We turned first to mysticism for an answer,
and found that although mysticism is entirely willing to
corroborate religion, it is too private (and also too various) in
its utterances to be able to claim a universal authority.  But
philosophy publishes results which claim to be universally valid
if they are valid at all, so we now turn with our question to
philosophy.  Can philosophy stamp a warrant of veracity upon the
religious man’s sense of the divine?
I imagine that many of you at this point begin to indulge in
guesses at the goal to which I am tending.  I have undermined the
authority of mysticism, you say, and the next thing I shall
probably do is to seek to discredit that of philosophy. 
Religion, you expect to hear me conclude, is nothing but an
affair of faith, based either on vague sentiment, or on that
vivid sense of the reality of things unseen of which in my second
lecture and in the lecture on Mysticism I gave so many examples. 
It is essentially private and individualistic; it always exceeds
our powers of formulation; and although attempts to pour its
contents into a philosophic mould will probably always go on, men
being what they are, yet these attempts are always secondary
processes which in no way add to the authority, or warrant the
veracity, of the sentiments from which they derive their own
stimulus and borrow whatever glow of conviction they may
themselves possess.  
In short, you suspect that I am planning to defend feeling at the
expense of reason, to rehabilitate the primitive and
unreflective, and to dissuade you from the hope of any Theology
worthy of the name.
To a certain extent I have to admit that you guess rightly. I do
believe that feeling is the deeper source of religion, and that
philosophic and theological formulas are secondary products, like
translations of a text into another tongue.  But all such
statements are misleading from their brevity, and it will take
the whole hour for me to explain to you exactly what I mean.
When I call theological formulas secondary products, I mean that
in a world in which no religious feeling had ever existed, I
doubt whether any philosophic theology could ever have been
framed.  I doubt if dispassionate intellectual contemplation of
the universe, apart from inner unhappiness and need of
deliverance on the one hand and mystical emotion on the other,
would ever have resulted in religious philosophies such as we now
possess.  Men would have begun with animistic explanations of
natural fact, and criticised these away into scientific ones, as
they actually have done. In the science they would have left a
certain amount of “psychical research,” even as they now will
probably have to re-admit a certain amount.  But high-flying
speculations like those of either dogmatic or idealistic
theology, these they would have had no motive to venture on,
feeling no need of commerce with such deities.  These
speculations must, it seems to me, be classed as over-beliefs,
buildings-out performed by the intellect into directions of which
feeling originally supplied the hint.
But even if religious philosophy had to have its first hint
supplied by feeling, may it not have dealt in a superior way with
the matter which feeling suggested?  Feeling is private and dumb,
and unable to give an account of itself.  It allows that its
results are mysteries and enigmas, declines to justify them
rationally, and on occasion is willing that they should even
pass for paradoxical and absurd.  Philosophy takes just the
opposite attitude.  Her aspiration is to reclaim from mystery and
paradox whatever territory she touches.  To find an escape from
obscure and wayward personal persuasion to truth objectively
valid for all thinking men has ever been the intellect’s most
cherished ideal.  To redeem religion from unwholesome privacy,
and to give public status and universal right of way to its
deliverances, has been reason’s task.
I believe that philosophy will always have opportunity to labor
at this task.[288] We are thinking beings, and we cannot exclude
the intellect from participating in any of our functions.  Even
in soliloquizing with ourselves, we construe our feelings
intellectually.  Both our personal ideals and our religious and
mystical experiences must be interpreted congruously with the
kind of scenery which our thinking mind inhabits.  The
philosophic climate of our time inevitably forces its own
clothing on us.  Moreover, we must exchange our feelings with one
another, and in doing so we have to speak, and to use general and
abstract verbal formulas. Conceptions and constructions are thus
a necessary part of our religion; and as moderator amid the clash
of hypotheses, and mediator among the criticisms of one man’s
constructions by another, philosophy will always have much to do.
It would be strange if I disputed this, when these very lectures
which I am giving are (as you will see more clearly from now
onwards) a laborious attempt to extract from the privacies of
religious experience some general facts which can be defined in
formulas upon which everybody may agree.
[288] Compare Professor W. Wallace’s Gifford Lectures, in
Lectures and Essays, Oxford, 1898, pp. 17 ff.
Religious experience, in other words, spontaneously and
inevitably engenders myths, superstitions, dogmas, creeds, and
metaphysical theologies, and criticisms of one set of these by
the adherents of another.  Of late, impartial classifications and
comparisons have become possible, alongside of the denunciations
and anathemas by which the commerce between creeds used
exclusively to be carried on.  We have the beginnings of a
"Science of Religions,” so-called; and if these lectures could
ever be accounted a crumb-like contribution to such a science, I
should be made very happy.
But all these intellectual operations, whether they be
constructive or comparative and critical, presuppose immediate
experiences as their subject-matter.  They are interpretative and
inductive operations, operations after the fact, consequent upon
religious feeling, not coordinate with it, not independent of
what it ascertains.
The intellectualism in religion which I wish to discredit
pretends to be something altogether different from this.  It
assumes to construct religious objects out of the resources of
logical reason alone, or of logical reason drawing rigorous
inference from non-subjective facts.  It calls its conclusions
dogmatic theology, or philosophy of the absolute, as the case may
be; it does not call them science of religions.  It reaches them
in an a priori way, and warrants their veracity.
Warranted systems have ever been the idols of aspiring souls. 
All-inclusive, yet simple; noble, clean, luminous, stable,
rigorous, true;–what more ideal refuge could there be than such
a system would offer to spirits vexed by the muddiness and
accidentality of the world of sensible things? Accordingly, we
find inculcated in the theological schools of to-day, almost as
much as in those of the fore-time, a disdain for merely possible
or probable truth, and of results that only private assurance can
grasp. Scholastics and idealists both express this disdain. 
Principal John Caird, for example, writes as follows in his
Introduction to the Philosophy of Religion:–
“Religion must indeed be a thing of the heart, but in order to
elevate it from the region of subjective caprice and waywardness,
and to distinguish between that which is true and false in
religion, we must appeal to an objective standard.  That which
enters the heart must first be discerned by the intelligence to
be TRUE.  It must be seen as having in its own nature a RIGHT to
dominate feeling, and as constituting the principle by which
feeling must be judged.[289] In estimating the religious
character of individuals, nations, or races, the first question
is, not how they feel, but what they think and believe–not
whether their religion is one which manifests itself in emotions,
more or less vehement and enthusiastic, but what are the
CONCEPTIONS of God and divine things by which these emotions are
called forth.  Feeling is necessary in religion, but it is by the
CONTENT or intelligent basis of a religion, and not by feeling,
that its character and worth are to be determined."[290]
[289] Op. cit., p. 174, abridged.
[290] Ibid., p. 186, abridged and italicized.
Cardinal Newman, in his work, The Idea of a University, gives
more emphatic expression still to this disdain for
sentiment.[291] Theology, he says, is a science in the strictest
sense of the word.  I will tell you, he says, what it is not–
not “physical evidences” for God, not “natural religion,” for
these are but vague subjective interpretations:–
[291] Discourse II.  Section 7.
“If,” he continues, “the Supreme Being is powerful or skillful,
just so far as the telescope shows power, or the microscope shows
skill, if his moral law is to be ascertained simply by the
physical processes of the animal frame, or his will gathered from
the immediate issues of human affairs, if his Essence is just as
high and deep and broad as the universe and no more if this be
the fact, then will I confess that there is no specific science
about God, that theology is but a name, and a protest in its
behalf an hypocrisy.  Then, pious as it is to think of Him while
the pageant of experiment or abstract reasoning passes by, still
such piety is nothing more than a poetry of thought, or an
ornament of language, a certain view taken of Nature which one
man has and another has not, which gifted minds strike out, which
others see to be admirable and ingenious, and which all would be
the better for adopting.  It is but the theology of Nature, just
as we talk of the PHILOSOPHY or the ROMANCE of history, or the
POETRY of childhood, or the picturesque or the sentimental or the
humorous, or any other abstract quality which the genius or the
caprice of the individual, or the fashion of the day, or the
consent of the world, recognizes in any set of objects which are
subjected to its contemplation.  I do not see much difference
between avowing that there is no God, and implying that nothing
definite can be known for certain about Him.”
What I mean by Theology, continues Newman, is none of these
things:  “I simply mean the SCIENCE OF GOD, or the truths we know
about God, put into a system, just as we have a science of the
stars and call it astronomy, or of the crust of the earth and
call it geology.”
In both these extracts we have the issue clearly set before us: 
Feeling valid only for the individual is pitted against reason
valid universally.  The test is a perfectly plain one of fact. 
Theology based on pure reason must in point of fact convince men
universally.  If it did not, wherein would its superiority
consist?  If it only formed sects and schools, even as sentiment
and mysticism form them, how would it fulfill its programme of
freeing us from personal caprice and waywardness?  This perfectly
definite practical test of the pretensions of philosophy to found
religion on universal reason simplifies my procedure to-day.  I
need not discredit philosophy by laborious criticism of its
arguments. It will suffice if I show that as a matter of history
it fails to prove its pretension to be “objectively” convincing. 
In fact, philosophy does so fail.  It does not banish
differences; it founds schools and sects just as feeling does.  I
believe, in fact, that the logical reason of man operates in this
field of divinity exactly as it has always operated in love, or
in patriotism, or in politics, or in any other of the wider
affairs of life, in which our passions or our mystical intuitions
fix our beliefs beforehand.  It finds arguments for our
conviction, for indeed it HAS to find them.  It amplifies and
defines our faith, and dignifies it and lends it words and
plausibility.  It hardly ever engenders it; it cannot now secure
it.[292]
[292] As regards the secondary character of intellectual
constructions, and the primacy of feeling and instinct in
founding religious beliefs see the striking work of H. Fielding,
The Hearts of Men, London, 1902, which came into my hands after
my text was written.  “Creeds,” says the author, “are the grammar
of religion, they are to religion what grammar is to speech. 
Words are the expression of our wants grammar is the theory
formed afterwards.  Speech never proceeded from grammar, but the
reverse.  As speech progresses and changes from unknown causes,
grammar must follow” (p. 313).  The whole book, which keeps
unusually close to concrete facts, is little more than an
amplification of this text.
Lend me your attention while I run through some of the points of
the older systematic theology.  You find them in both Protestant
and Catholic manuals, best of all in the innumerable text-books
published since Pope Leo’s Encyclical recommending the study of
Saint Thomas.  I glance first at the arguments by which dogmatic
theology establishes God’s existence, after that at those by
which it establishes his nature.[293]
[293] For convenience’ sake, I follow the order of A. Stockl’s
Lehrbuch der Philosophie, 5te Autlage, Mainz, 1881, Band ii.  B. 
Boedder’s Natural Theology, London, 1891, is a handy English
Catholic Manual; but an almost identical doctrine is given by
such Protestant theologians as C. Hodge:  Systematic Theology,
New York, 1873, or A. H. Strong:  Systematic Theology, 5th
edition, New York, 1896.
The arguments for God’s existence have stood for hundreds of
years with the waves of unbelieving criticism breaking against
them, never totally discrediting them in the ears of the
faithful, but on the whole slowly and surely washing out the
mortar from between their joints.  If you have a God already whom
you believe in, these arguments confirm you. If you are
atheistic, they fail to set you right.  The proofs are various. 
The “cosmological” one, so-called, reasons from the contingence
of the world to a First Cause which must contain whatever
perfections the world itself contains.  The “argument
from design” reasons, from the fact that Nature’s laws are
mathematical, and her parts benevolently adapted to each other,
that this cause is both intellectual and benevolent. The “moral
argument” is that the moral law presupposes a lawgiver.  The
"argument ex consensu gentium” is that the belief in God is so
widespread as to be grounded in the rational nature of man, and
should therefore carry authority with it.
As I just said, I will not discuss these arguments technically.
The bare fact that all idealists since Kant have felt entitled
either to scout or to neglect them shows that they are not solid
enough to serve as religion’s all-sufficient foundation. 
Absolutely impersonal reasons would be in duty bound to show more
general convincingness.  Causation is indeed too obscure a
principle to bear the weight of the whole structure of theology. 
As for the argument from design, see how Darwinian ideas have
revolutionized it.  Conceived as we now conceive them, as so many
fortunate escapes from almost limitless processes of destruction,
the benevolent adaptations which we find in Nature suggest a
deity very different from the one who figured in the earlier
versions of the argument.[294] The fact is that these arguments 
do but follow the combined suggestions of the facts and of our
feeling.  They prove nothing rigorously.  They only corroborate
our preexistent partialities.
[294] It must not be forgotten that any form of DISorder in the
world might, by the design argument, suggest a God for just that
kind of disorder.  The truth is that any state of things whatever
that can be named is logically susceptible of teleological
interpretation. The ruins of the earthquake at Lisbon, for
example:  the whole of past history had to be planned exactly as
it was to bring about in the fullness of time just that
particular arrangement of debris of masonry, furniture, and once
living bodies.  No other train of causes would have been
sufficient.  And so of any other arrangement, bad or good, which
might as a matter of fact be found resulting anywhere from
previous conditions.  To avoid such pessimistic consequences and
save its beneficent designer, the design argument accordingly
invokes two other principles, restrictive in their operation. 
The first is physical:  Nature’s forces tend of their own accord
only to disorder and destruction, to heaps of ruins, not to
architecture.
This principle, though plausible at first sight, seems, in the
light of recent biology, to be more and more improbable.  The
second principle is one of anthropomorphic interpretation.  No
arrangement that for us is “disorderly” can possibly have been an
object of design at all.  This principle is of course a mere
assumption in the interests of anthropomorphic Theism.
When one views the world with no definite theological bias one
way or the other, one sees that order and disorder, as we now
recognize them, are purely human inventions.  We are interested
in certain types of arrangement, useful, aesthetic, or moral–so
interested that whenever we find them realized, the fact
emphatically rivets our attention.  The result is that we work
over the contents of the world selectively.  It is overflowing
with disorderly arrangements from our point of view, but order is
the only thing we care for and look at, and by choosing, one can
always find some sort of orderly arrangement in the midst of any
chaos.  If I should throw down a thousand beans at random upon a
table, I could doubtless, by eliminating a sufficient number of
them, leave the rest in almost any geometrical pattern you might
propose to me, and you might then say that that pattern was the
thing prefigured beforehand, and that the other beans were mere
irrelevance and packing material.  Our dealings with Nature are
just like this.  She is a vast plenum in which our attention
draws capricious lines in innumerable directions.  We count and
name whatever lies upon the special lines we trace, whilst the
other things and the untraced lines are neither named nor
counted. There are in reality infinitely more things “unadapted"
to each other in this world than there are things “adapted";
infinitely more things with irregular relations than with regular
relations between them.  But we look for the regular kind of
thing exclusively, and ingeniously discover and preserve it in
our memory.  It accumulates with other regular kinds, until the
collection of them fills our encyclopaedias.  Yet all the while
between and around them lies an infinite anonymous chaos of
objects that no one ever thought of together, of relations that
never yet attracted our attention.
The facts of order from which the physico-theological argument
starts are thus easily susceptible of interpretation as arbitrary
human products.  So long as this is the case, although of course
no argument against God follows, it follows that the argument for
him will fail to constitute a knockdown proof of his existence. 
It will be convincing only to those who on other grounds believe
in him already.
If philosophy can do so little to establish God’s existence, how
stands it with her efforts to define his attributes?  It is worth
while to look at the attempts of systematic theology in this
direction.
Since God is First Cause, this science of sciences says, he
differs from all his creatures in possessing existence a se. 
From this “a-se-ity” on God’s part, theology deduces by mere
logic most of his other perfections.  For instance, he must be
both NECESSARY and ABSOLUTE, cannot not be, and cannot in any way
be determined by anything else.  This makes Him absolutely
unlimited from without, and unlimited also from within; for
limitation is non-being; and God is being itself.  This
unlimitedness makes God infinitely perfect.  Moreover, God is
ONE, and ONLY, for the infinitely perfect can admit no peer.  He
is SPIRITUAL, for were He composed of physical parts, some other
power would have to combine them into the total, and his aseity
would thus be contradicted.  He is therefore both simple and
non-physical in nature.  He is SIMPLE METAPHYSICALLY also, that
is to say, his nature and his existence cannot be distinct, as
they are in finite substances which share their formal natures
with one another, and are individual only in their material
aspect.  Since God is one and only, his essentia and his esse
must be given at one stroke.  This excludes from his being all
those distinctions, so familiar in the world of finite things,
between potentiality and actuality, substance and accidents,
being and activity, existence and attributes.  We can talk, it is
true, of God’s powers, acts, and attributes, but these
discriminations are only “virtual,” and made from the human point
of view.  In God all these points of view fall into an absolute
identity of being.
This absence of all potentiality in God obliges Him to be
IMMUTABLE.  He is actuality, through and through.  Were there
anything potential about Him, He would either lose or gain by its
actualization, and either loss or gain would contradict his
perfection.  He cannot, therefore, change.  Furthermore, He is
IMMENSE, BOUNDLESS; for could He be outlined in space, He would
be composite, and this would contradict his indivisibility. He is
therefore OMNIPRESENT, indivisibly there, at every point of
space.  He is similarly wholly present at every point of time–in
other words ETERNAL.  For if He began in time, He would need a
prior cause, and that would contradict his aseity.  If He ended
it would contradict his necessity.  If He went through any
succession, it would contradict his immutability.
He has INTELLIGENCE and WILL and every other creature-
perfection, for we have them, and effectus nequit superare
causam.  In Him, however, they are absolutely and eternally in
act, and their OBJECT, since God can be bounded by naught that is
external, can primarily be nothing else than God himself.  He
knows himself, then, in one eternal indivisible act, and wills
himself with an infinite self-pleasure.[295] Since He must of
logical necessity thus love and will himself, He cannot be called
"free” ad intra, with the freedom of contrarieties that
characterizes finite creatures.  Ad extra, however, or with
respect to his creation, God is free.  He cannot NEED to create,
being perfect in being and in happiness already.  He WILLS to
create, then, by an absolute freedom.
[295] For the scholastics the facultas appetendi embraces
feeling, desire, and will.
Being thus a substance endowed with intellect and will and
freedom, God is a PERSON; and a LIVING person also, for He is
both object and subject of his own activity, and to be this
distinguishes the living from the lifeless.  He is thus
absolutely SELF-SUFFICIENT:  his SELF-KNOWLEDGE and SELF-LOVE are
both of them infinite and adequate, and need no extraneous
conditions to perfect them.
He is OMNISCIENT, for in knowing himself as Cause He knows all
creature things and events by implication.  His knowledge is
previsive, for He is present to all time.  Even our free acts are
known beforehand to Him, for otherwise his wisdom would admit of
successive moments of enrichment, and this would contradict his
immutability.  He is OMNIPOTENT for everything that does not
involve logical contradiction.  He can make BEING –in other
words his power includes CREATION.  If what He creates were made
of his own substance, it would have to be infinite in essence, as
that substance is; but it is finite; so it must be non-divine in
substance.  If it were made of a substance, an eternally existing
matter, for example, which God found there to his hand, and to
which He simply gave its form, that would contradict God’s
definition as First Cause, and make Him a mere mover of something
caused already.  The things he creates, then, He creates ex
nihilo, and gives them absolute being as so many finite
substances additional to himself.  The forms which he imprints
upon them have their prototypes in his ideas.  But as in God
there is no such thing as multiplicity, and as these ideas for us
are manifold, we must distinguish the ideas as they are in God
and the way in which our minds externally imitate them.  We must
attribute them to Him only in a TERMINATIVE sense, as differing
aspects, from the finite point of view, of his unique essence.
God of course is holy, good, and just.  He can do no evil, for He
is positive being’s fullness, and evil is negation.  It is true
that He has created physical evil in places, but only as a means
of wider good, for bonum totius praeeminet bonum partis. Moral
evil He cannot will, either as end or means, for that would
contradict his holiness.  By creating free beings He PERMITS it
only, neither his justice nor his goodness obliging Him to
prevent the recipients of freedom from misusing the gift.
As regards God’s purpose in creating, primarily it can only have
been to exercise his absolute freedom by the manifestation to
others of his glory.  From this it follows that the others must
be rational beings, capable in the first place of knowledge,
love, and honor, and in the second place of happiness, for the
knowledge and love of God is the mainspring of felicity.  In so
far forth one may say that God’s secondary purpose in creating is
LOVE.
I will not weary you by pursuing these metaphysical
determinations farther, into the mysteries of God’s Trinity, for
example.  What I have given will serve as a specimen of the
orthodox philosophical theology of both Catholics and
Protestants.  Newman, filled with enthusiasm at God’s list of
perfections, continues the passage which I began to quote to you
by a couple of pages of a rhetoric so magnificent that I can
hardly refrain from adding them, in spite of the inroad they
would make upon our time.[296]  He first enumerates God’s
attributes sonorously, then celebrates his ownership of
everything in earth and Heaven, and the dependence of all that
happens upon his permissive will.  He gives us scholastic
philosophy “touched with emotion,” and every philosophy should be
touched with emotion to be rightly understood.  Emotionally,
then, dogmatic theology is worth something to minds of the type
of Newman’s.  It will aid us to estimate what it is worth
intellectually, if at this point I make a short digression.
[296] Op. cit., Discourse III. Section 7.
What God hath joined together, let no man put asunder. The
Continental schools of philosophy have too often overlooked the
fact that man’s thinking is organically connected with his
conduct.  It seems to me to be the chief glory of English and
Scottish thinkers to have kept the organic connection in view. 
The guiding principle of British philosophy has in fact been that
every difference must MAKE a difference, every theoretical
difference somewhere issue in a practical difference, and that
the best method of discussing points of theory is to begin by
ascertaining what practical difference would result from one
alternative or the other being true.  What is the particular
truth in question KNOWN AS?  In what facts does it result?  What
is its cash-value in terms of particular experience?  This is the
characteristic English way of taking up a question.  In this way,
you remember, Locke takes up the question of personal identity.
What you mean by it is just your chain of particular memories,
says he.  That is the only concretely verifiable part of its
significance.  All further ideas about it, such as the oneness or
manyness of the spiritual substance on which it is based, are
therefore void of intelligible meaning; and propositions touching
such ideas may be indifferently affirmed or denied.  So Berkeley
with his “matter.”
The cash-value of matter is our physical sensations.  That is
what it is known as, all that we concretely verify of its
conception.  That, therefore, is the whole meaning of the term
"matter"–any other pretended meaning is mere wind of words. 
Hume does the same thing with causation.  It is known as habitual
antecedence, and as tendency on our part to look for something
definite to come.  Apart from this practical meaning it has no
significance whatever, and books about it may be committed to the
flames, says Hume.  Dugald Stewart and Thomas Brown, James Mill,
John Mill, and Professor Bain, have followed more or less
consistently the same method; and Shadworth Hodgson has used the
principle with full explicitness.  When all is said and done, it
was English and Scotch writers, and not Kant, who introduced “the
critical method” into philosophy, the one method fitted to make
philosophy a study worthy of serious men.  For what seriousness
can possibly remain in debating philosophic propositions that
will never make an appreciable difference to us in action?  And
what could it matter, if all propositions were practically
indifferent, which of them we should agree to call true or which
false?
An American philosopher of eminent originality, Mr. Charles
Sanders Peirce, has rendered thought a service by disentangling
from the particulars of its application the principle by which
these men were instinctively guided, and by singling it out as
fundamental and giving to it a Greek name.  He calls it the
principle of PRAGMATISM, and he defends it somewhat as
follows:[297]–
[297] In an article, How to make our Ideas Clear, in the Popular
Science Monthly for January, 1878, vol. xii. p. 286.
Thought in movement has for its only conceivable motive the
attainment of belief, or thought at rest.  Only when our thought
about a subject has found its rest in belief can our action on
the subject firmly and safely begin.  Beliefs, in short, are
rules for action; and the whole function of thinking is but one
step in the production of active habits.  If there were any part
of a thought that made no difference in the thought’s practical
consequences, then that part would be no proper element of the
thought’s significance.  To develop a thought’s meaning we need
therefore only determine what conduct it is fitted to produce;
that conduct is for us its sole significance; and the tangible
fact at the root of all our thought-distinctions is that there is
no one of them so fine as to consist in anything but a possible
difference of practice.  To attain perfect clearness in our
thoughts of an object, we need then only consider what
sensations, immediate or remote, we are conceivably to expect
from it, and what conduct we must prepare in case the object
should be true.  Our conception of these practical consequences
is for us the whole of our conception of the object, so far as
that conception has positive significance at all.
This is the principle of Peirce, the principle of pragmatism.
Such a principle will help us on this occasion to decide, among
the various attributes set down in the scholastic inventory of
God’s perfections, whether some be not far less significant than
others.
If, namely, we apply the principle of pragmatism to God’s
metaphysical attributes, strictly so called, as distinguished
from his moral attributes, I think that, even were we forced by a
coercive logic to believe them, we still should have to confess
them to be destitute of all intelligible significance. Take God’s
aseity, for example; or his necessariness; his immateriality; his
"simplicity” or superiority to the kind of inner variety and
succession which we find in finite beings, his indivisibility,
and lack of the inner distinctions of being and activity,
substance and accident, potentiality and actuality, and the rest;
his repudiation of inclusion in a genus; his actualized infinity;
his “personality,” apart from the moral qualities which it may
comport; his relations to evil being permissive and not positive;
his self-sufficiency, self-love, and absolute felicity in
himself:–candidly speaking, how do such qualities as these
make any definite connection with our life?  And if they
severally call for no distinctive adaptations of our conduct,
what vital difference can it possibly make to a man’s religion
whether they be true or false?
For my own part, although I dislike to say aught that may grate
upon tender associations, I must frankly confess that even though
these attributes were faultlessly deduced, I cannot conceive of
its being of the smallest consequence to us religiously that any
one of them should be true.  Pray, what specific act can I
perform in order to adapt myself the better to God’s simplicity? 
Or how does it assist me to plan my behavior, to know that his
happiness is anyhow absolutely complete?  In the middle of the
century just past, Mayne Reid was the great writer of books of
out-of-door adventure. He was forever extolling the hunters and
field-observers of living animals’ habits, and keeping up a fire
of invective against the “closet-naturalists,” as he called them,
the collectors and classifiers, and handlers of skeletons and
skins.  When I was a boy, I used to think that a closet-
naturalist must be the vilest type of wretch under the sun. But
surely the systematic theologians are the closet-naturalists of
the deity, even in Captain Mayne Reid’s sense.  What is their
deduction of metaphysical attributes but a shuffling and matching
of pedantic dictionary-adjectives, aloof from morals, aloof from
human needs, something that might be worked out from the mere
word “God” by one of those logical machines of wood and brass
which recent ingenuity has contrived as well as by a man of flesh
and blood.  They have the trail of the serpent over them.  One
feels that in the theologians’ hands, they are only a set of
titles obtained by a mechanical manipulation of synonyms;
verbality has stepped into the place of vision, professionalism
into that of life.  Instead of bread we have a stone; instead of
a fish, a serpent.  Did such a conglomeration of abstract terms
give really the gist of our knowledge of the deity, schools of
theology might indeed continue to flourish, but religion, vital
religion, would have taken its flight from this world. What keeps
religion going is something else than abstract definitions and
systems of concatenated adjectives, and something different from
faculties of theology and their professors.  All these things are
after-effects, secondary accretions upon those phenomena of vital
conversation with the unseen divine, of which I have shown you so
many instances, renewing themselves in saecula saeculorum in the
lives of humble private men.
So much for the metaphysical attributes of God!  From the point
of view of practical religion, the metaphysical monster which
they offer to our worship is an absolutely worthless invention of
the scholarly mind.
What shall we now say of the attributes called moral?
Pragmatically, they stand on an entirely different footing. They
positively determine fear and hope and expectation, and are
foundations for the saintly life.  It needs but a glance at them
to show how great is their significance.
God’s holiness, for example:  being holy, God can will nothing
but the good.  Being omnipotent, he can secure its triumph. 
Being omniscient, he can see us in the dark.  Being just, he can
punish us for what he sees.  Being loving, he can pardon too. 
Being unalterable, we can count on him securely.  These qualities
enter into connection with our life, it is highly important that
we should be informed concerning them.  That God’s purpose in
creation should be the manifestation of his glory is also an
attribute which has definite relations to our practical life. 
Among other things it has given a definite character to worship
in all Christian countries.  If dogmatic theology really does
prove beyond dispute that a God with characters like these
exists, she may well claim to give a solid basis to religious
sentiment.  But verily, how stands it with her arguments?
It stands with them as ill as with the arguments for his
existence.  Not only do post-Kantian idealists reject them root
and branch, but it is a plain historic fact that they never have
converted any one who has found in the moral complexion of the
world, as he experienced it, reasons for doubting that a good God
can have framed it.  To prove God’s goodness by the scholastic
argument that there is no non-being in his essence would sound
to such a witness simply silly.
No! the book of Job went over this whole matter once for all and
definitively.  Ratiocination is a relatively superficial and
unreal path to the deity:  “I will lay mine hand upon my mouth; I
have heard of Thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye
seeth Thee.”  An intellect perplexed and baffled, yet a
trustful sense of presence–such is the situation of the man who
is sincere with himself and with the facts, but who remains
religious still.[298]
[298] Pragmatically, the most important attribute of God is his
punitive justice.  But who, in the present state of theological
opinion on that point, will dare maintain that hell fire or its
equivalent in some shape is rendered certain by pure logic? 
Theology herself has largely based this doctrine upon revelation,
and, in discussing it, has tended more and more to substitute
conventional ideas of criminal law for a priori principles of
reason.  But the very notion that this glorious universe, with
planets and winds, and laughing sky and ocean, should have been
conceived and had its beams and rafters laid in technicalities of
criminality, is incredible to our modern imagination.  It weakens
a religion to hear it argued upon such a basis.
We must therefore, I think, bid a definitive good-by to dogmatic
theology.  In all sincerity our faith must do without that
warrant.  Modern idealism, I repeat, has said goodby to this
theology forever.  Can modern idealism give faith a better
warrant, or must she still rely on her poor self for witness?
The basis of modern idealism is Kant’s doctrine of the
Transcendental Ego of Apperception.  By this formidable term Kant
merely meant the fact that the consciousness “I think them” must
(potentially or actually) accompany all our objects.  Former
skeptics had said as much, but the “I” in question had remained
for them identified with the personal individual.  Kant
abstracted and depersonalized it, and made it the most universal
of all his categories, although for Kant himself the
Transcendental Ego had no theological implications.
It was reserved for his successors to convert Kant’s notion of
Bewusstsein uberhaupt, or abstract consciousness, into an
infinite concrete self-consciousness which is the soul of the
world, and in which our sundry personal self-consciousnesses
have their being.  It would lead me into technicalities to show
you even briefly how this transformation was in point of fact
effected.  Suffice it to say that in the Hegelian school, which
to-day so deeply influences both British and American thinking,
two principles have borne the brunt of the operation.
The first of these principles is that the old logic of identity
never gives us more than a post-mortem dissection of disjecta
membra, and that the fullness of life can be construed to thought
only by recognizing that every object which our thought may
propose to itself involves the notion of some other object which
seems at first to negate the first one.
The second principle is that to be conscious of a negation is
already virtually to be beyond it.  The mere asking of a question
or expression of a dissatisfaction proves that the answer or the
satisfaction is already imminent; the finite, realized as such,
is already the infinite in posse.
Applying these principles, we seem to get a propulsive force into
our logic which the ordinary logic of a bare, stark self-identity
in each thing never attains to.  The objects of our thought now
ACT within our thought, act as objects act when given in
experience.  They change and develop. They introduce something
other than themselves along with them; and this other, at first
only ideal or potential, presently proves itself also to be
actual.  It supersedes the thing at first supposed, and both
verifies and corrects it, in developing the fullness of its
meaning.
The program is excellent; the universe IS a place where things
are followed by other things that both correct and fulfill them;
and a logic which gave us something like this movement of fact
would express truth far better than the traditional school-logic,
which never gets of its own accord from anything to anything
else, and registers only predictions and subsumptions, or static
resemblances and differences. Nothing could be more unlike the
methods of dogmatic theology than those of this new logic.  Let
me quote in illustration some passages from the Scottish
transcendentalist whom I have already named.
“How are we to conceive,” Principal Caird writes, “of the reality
in which all intelligence rests?”  He replies:  “Two things may
without difficulty be proved, viz., that this reality is an
absolute Spirit, and conversely that it is only in communion with
this absolute Spirit or Intelligence that the finite Spirit can
realize itself.  It is absolute; for the faintest movement of
human intelligence would be arrested, if it did not presuppose
the absolute reality of intelligence, of thought itself.  Doubt
or denial themselves presuppose and indirectly affirm it.  When I
pronounce anything to be true, I pronounce it, indeed, to be
relative to thought, but not to be relative to my thought, or to
the thought of any other individual mind.  From the existence of
all individual minds as such I can abstract; I can think them
away.  But that which I cannot think away is thought or
self-consciousness itself, in its independence and absoluteness,
or, in other words, an Absolute Thought or Self-Consciousness.”
Here, you see, Principal Caird makes the transition which Kant
did not make:  he converts the omnipresence of consciousness in
general as a condition of “truth” being anywhere possible, into
an omnipresent universal consciousness, which he identifies with
God in his concreteness.  He next proceeds to use the principle
that to acknowledge your limits is in essence to be beyond them;
and makes the transition to the religious experience of
individuals in the following words:–
“If [Man] were only a creature of transient sensations and
impulses, of an ever coming and going succession of intuitions,
fancies, feelings, then nothing could ever have for him the
character of objective truth or reality.  But it is the
prerogative of man’s spiritual nature that he can yield himself
up to a thought and will that are infinitely larger than his own. 
As a thinking self-conscious being, indeed, he may be said, by
his very nature, to live in the atmosphere of the Universal Life.
As a thinking being, it is possible for me to suppress and quell
in my consciousness every movement of self-assertion, every
notion and opinion that is merely mine, every desire that belongs
to me as this particular Self, and to become the pure medium of a
thought that is universal–in one word, to live no more my own
life, but let my consciousness be possessed and suffused by the
Infinite and Eternal life of spirit.  And yet it is just in this
renunciation of self that I truly gain myself, or realize the
highest possibilities of my own nature.  For whilst in one sense
we give up self to live the universal and absolute life of
reason, yet that to which we thus surrender ourselves is in
reality our truer self.  The life of absolute reason is not a
life that is foreign to us.”
Nevertheless, Principal Caird goes on to say, so far as we are
able outwardly to realize this doctrine, the balm it offers
remains incomplete.  Whatever we may be in posse, the very best
of us in actu falls very short of being absolutely divine. Social
morality, love, and self-sacrifice even, merge our Self only in
some other finite self or selves.  They do not quite identify it
with the Infinite.  Man’s ideal destiny, infinite in abstract
logic, might thus seem in practice forever unrealizable.
“Is there, then,” our author continues, “no solution of the
contradiction between the ideal and the actual?  We answer, There
is such a solution, but in order to reach it we are carried
beyond the sphere of morality into that of religion.  It may be
said to be the essential characteristic of religion as contrasted
with morality, that it changes aspiration into fruition,
anticipation into realization; that instead of leaving man in the
interminable pursuit of a vanishing ideal, it makes him the
actual partaker of a divine or infinite life.  Whether we view
religion from the human side or the divine–as the surrender of
the soul to God, or as the life of God in the soul–in either
aspect it is of its very essence that the Infinite has ceased to
be a far-off vision, and has become a present reality.  The very
first pulsation of the spiritual life, when we rightly apprehend
its significance, is the indication that the division between the
Spirit and its object has vanished, that the ideal has become
real, that the finite has reached its goal and become suffused
with the presence and life of the Infinite.
“Oneness of mind and will with the divine mind and will is not
the future hope and aim of religion, but its very beginning and
birth in the soul.  To enter on the religious life is to
terminate the struggle.  In that act which constitutes the
beginning of the religious life–call it faith, or trust, or
self-surrender, or by whatever name you will–there is involved
the identification of the finite with a life which is eternally
realized.  It is true indeed that the religious life is
progressive; but understood in the light of the foregoing idea,
religious progress is not progress TOWARDS, but WITHIN the sphere
of the Infinite.  It is not the vain attempt by endless finite
additions or increments to become possessed of infinite wealth,
but it is the endeavor, by the constant exercise of spiritual
activity, to appropriate that infinite inheritance of which we
are already in possession.  The whole future of the religious
life is given in its beginning, but it is given implicitly.  The
position of the man who has entered on the religious life is that
evil, error, imperfection, do not really belong to him:  they are
excrescences which have no organic relation to his true nature: 
they are already virtually, as they will be actually, suppressed
and annulled, and in the very process of being annulled they
become the means of spiritual progress.  Though he is not exempt
from temptation and conflict, [yet] in that inner sphere in which
his true life lies, the struggle is over, the victory already
achieved.  It is not a finite but an infinite life which the
spirit lives.  Every pulse-beat of its [existence] is the
expression and realization of the life of God."[299]
[299] John Caird:  An Introduction to the Philosophy of Religion
London and New York, 1880, pp. 243-250, and 291-299, much
abridged.
You will readily admit that no description of the phenomena of
the religious consciousness could be better than these words of
your lamented preacher and philosopher. They reproduce the very
rapture of those crises of conversion of which we have been
hearing; they utter what the mystic felt but was unable to
communicate; and the saint, in hearing them, recognizes his own
experience.  It is indeed gratifying to find the content of
religion reported so unanimously.  But when all is said and done,
has Principal Caird–and I only use him as an example of that
whole mode of thinking–transcended the sphere of feeling and of
the direct experience of the individual, and laid the foundations
of religion in impartial reason?  Has he made religion universal
by coercive reasoning, transformed it from a private faith into a
public certainty?  Has he rescued its affirmations from obscurity
and mystery?
I believe that he has done nothing of the kind, but that he has
simply reaffirmed the individual’s experiences in a more
generalized vocabulary.  And again, I can be excused from proving
technically that the transcendentalist reasonings fail to make
religion universal, for I can point to the plain fact that a
majority of scholars, even religiously disposed ones, stubbornly
refuse to treat them as convincing.  The whole of Germany, one
may say, has positively rejected the Hegelian argumentation.  As
for Scotland, I need only mention Professor Fraser’s and
Professor Pringle-Pattison’s memorable criticisms, with which so
many of you are familiar.[300]  Once more, I ask, if
transcendental idealism were <445> as objectively and absolutely
rational as it pretends to be, could it possibly fail so
egregiously to be persuasive?
[300] A. C. Fraser:  Philosophy of Theism, second edition,
Edinburgh and London, 1899, especially part ii, chaps. vii. and
viii.  A. Seth [Pringle-Pattison]:  Hegelianism and Personality,
Ibid., 1890, passim.
The most persuasive arguments in favor of a concrete individual
Soul of the world, with which I am acquainted, are those of my
colleague, Josiah Royce, in his Religious Aspect of Philosophy,
Boston, 1885; in his Conception of God, New York and London,
1897; and lately in his Aberdeen Gifford Lectures, The World and
the Individual, 2 vols., New York and London, 1901-02.  I
doubtless seem to some of my readers to evade the philosophic
duty which my thesis in this lecture imposes on me, by not even
attempting to meet Professor Royce’s arguments articulately.  I
admit the momentary evasion.  In the present lectures, which are
cast throughout in a popular mould, there seemed no room for
subtle metaphysical discussion, and for tactical purposes it was
sufficient the contention of philosophy being what it is (namely,
that religion can be transformed into a universally convincing
science), to point to the fact that no religious philosophy has
actually convinced the mass of thinkers.  Meanwhile let me say
that I hope that the present volume may be followed by another,
if I am spared to write it, in which not only Professor Royce’s
arguments, but others for monistic absolutism shall be considered
with all the technical fullness which their great importance
calls for.  At present I resign myself to lying passive under the
reproach of superficiality.
What religion reports, you must remember, always purports to be a
fact of experience:  the divine is actually present, religion
says, and between it and ourselves relations of give and take are
actual.  If definite perceptions of fact like this cannot stand
upon their own feet, surely abstract reasoning cannot give them
the support they are in need of.  Conceptual processes can class
facts, define them, interpret them; but they do not produce them,
nor can they reproduce their individuality.  There is always a
PLUS, a THISNESS, which feeling alone can answer for.  Philosophy
in this sphere is thus a secondary function, unable to warrant
faith’s veracity, and so I revert to the thesis which I announced
at the beginning of this lecture.
In all sad sincerity I think we must conclude that the attempt to
demonstrate by purely intellectual processes the truth of the
deliverances of direct religious experience is absolutely
hopeless.
It would be unfair to philosophy, however, to leave her under
this negative sentence.  Let me close, then, by briefly
enumerating what she CAN do for religion.  If she will abandon
metaphysics and deduction for criticism and induction, and
frankly transform herself from theology into science of
religions, she can make herself enormously useful.
The spontaneous intellect of man always defines the divine which
it feels in ways that harmonize with its temporary intellectual
prepossessions.  Philosophy can by comparison eliminate the local
and the accidental from these definitions.  Both from dogma and
from worship she can remove historic incrustations.  By
confronting the spontaneous religious constructions with the
results of natural science, philosophy can also eliminate
doctrines that are now known to be scientifically absurd or
incongruous.
 
Sifting out in this way unworthy formulations, she can leave a
residuum of conceptions that at least are possible. With these
she can deal as HYPOTHESES, testing them in all the manners,
whether negative or positive, by which hypotheses are ever
tested.  She can reduce their number, as some are found more open
to objection.  She can perhaps become the champion of one which
she picks out as being the most closely verified or verifiable. 
She can refine upon the definition of this hypothesis,
distinguishing between what is innocent over-belief and symbolism
in the expression of it, and what is to be literally taken.  As a
result, she can offer mediation between different believers, and
help to bring about consensus of opinion.  She can do this the
more successfully, the better she discriminates the common and
essential from the individual and local elements of the religious
beliefs which she compares.
I do not see why a critical Science of Religions of this sort
might not eventually command as general a public adhesion as is
commanded by a physical science.  Even the personally
non-religious might accept its conclusions on trust, much as
blind persons now accept the facts of optics–it might appear as
foolish to refuse them.  Yet as the science of optics has to be
fed in the first instance, and continually verified later, by
facts experienced by seeing persons; so the science of religions
would depend for its original material on facts of personal
experience, and would have to square itself with personal
experience through all its critical reconstructions.  It could
never get away from concrete life, or work in a conceptual
vacuum.  It would forever have to confess, as every science
confesses, that the subtlety of nature flies beyond it, and that
its formulas are but approximations. Philosophy lives in words,
but truth and fact well up into our lives in ways that exceed
verbal formulation.  There is in the living act of perception
always something that glimmers and twinkles and will not be
caught, and for which reflection comes too late.  No one knows
this as well as the philosopher.  He must fire his volley of new
vocables out of his conceptual shotgun, for his profession
condemns him to this industry, but he secretly knows the
hollowness and irrelevancy. His formulas are like stereoscopic or
kinetoscopic photographs seen outside the instrument; they lack
the depth, the motion, the vitality.  In the religious sphere, in
particular, belief that formulas are true can never wholly take
the place of personal experience.
In my next lecture I will try to complete my rough description of
religious experience; and in the lecture after that, which is the
last one, I will try my hand at formulating conceptually the
truth to which it is a witness.
We have wound our way back, after our excursion through mysticism
and philosophy, to where we were before:  the uses of religion,
its uses to the individual who has it, and the uses of the
individual himself to the world, are the best arguments that
truth is in it.  We return to the empirical philosophy:  the true
is what works well, even though the qualification “on the whole"
may always have to be added.  In this lecture we must revert to
description again, and finish our picture of the religious
consciousness by a word about some of its other characteristic
elements.  Then, in a final lecture, we shall be free to make a
general review and draw our independent conclusions.
The first point I will speak of is the part which the aesthetic
life plays in determining one’s choice of a religion.  Men, I
said awhile ago, involuntarily intellectualize their religious
experience.  They need formulas, just as they need fellowship in
worship.  I spoke, therefore, too contemptuously of the pragmatic
uselessness of the famous scholastic list of attributes of the
deity, for they have one use which I neglected to consider.  The
eloquent passage in which Newman enumerates them[301] puts us on
the track of it.  Intoning them as he would intone a cathedral
service, he shows how high is their aesthetic value.  It enriches
our bare piety to carry these exalted and mysterious verbal
additions just as it enriches a church to have an organ and old
brasses, marbles and frescoes and stained windows.  Epithets lend
an atmosphere and overtones to our devotion.  They are like a
hymn of praise and service of glory, and may sound the more
sublime for being incomprehensible.  Minds like Newman’s[302]
grow as jealous of their credit as heathen priests are of that of
the jewelry and ornaments that blaze upon their idols.
[301] Idea of a University, Discourse III.  Section 7.
[302] Newman’s imagination so innately craved an ecclesiastical
system that he can write:  “From the age of fifteen, dogma has
been the fundamental principle of my religion:  I know no other
religion; I cannot enter into the idea of any other sort of
religion.”  And again speaking of himself about the age of
thirty, he writes:  “I loved to act as feeling myself in my
Bishop’s sight, as if it were the sight of God.”  Apologia, 1897,
pp. 48, 50.
Among the buildings-out of religion which the mind spontaneously
indulges in, the aesthetic motive must never be forgotten.  I
promised to say nothing of ecclesiastical systems in these
lectures.  I may be allowed, however, to put in a word at this
point on the way in which their satisfaction of certain aesthetic
needs contributes to their hold on human nature.  Although some
persons aim most at intellectual purity and simplification, for
others RICHNESS is the supreme imaginative requirement.[303] When
one’s mind is strongly of this type, an individual religion will
hardly serve the purpose. The inner need is rather of something
institutional and complex, majestic in the hierarchic
interrelatedness of its parts, with authority descending from
stage to stage, and at every stage objects for adjectives of
mystery and splendor, derived in the last resort from the Godhead
who is the fountain and culmination of the system.  One feels
then as if in presence of some vast incrusted work of jewelry or
architecture; one hears the multitudinous liturgical appeal; one
gets the honorific vibration coming from every quarter.  Compared
with such a noble complexity, in which ascending and descending
movements seem in no way to jar upon stability, in which no
single item, however humble, is insignificant, because so many
august institutions hold it in its place, how flat does
evangelical Protestantism appear, how bare the atmosphere of
those isolated religious lives whose boast it is that “man in the
bush with God may meet."[304] What a pulverization and leveling
of what a gloriously piled-up structure!  To an imagination used
to the perspectives of dignity and glory, the naked gospel scheme
seems to offer an almshouse for a palace.
[303] The intellectual difference is quite on a par in practical
importance with the analogous difference in character.  We saw,
under the head of Saintliness, how some characters resent
confusion and must live in purity, consistency, simplicity
(above, p. 275 ff.).  For others, on the contrary,
superabundance, over-pressure, stimulation, lots of superficial
relations, are indispensable.  There are men who would suffer a
very syncope if you should pay all their debts, bring it about
that their engagements had been kept, their letters answered
their perplexities relieved, and their duties fulfilled, down to
one which lay on a clean table under their eyes with nothing to
interfere with its immediate performance.  A day stripped so
staringly bare would be for them appalling.  So with ease,
elegance, tributes of affection, social recognitions–some of us
require amounts of these things which to others would appear a
mass of lying and sophistication.
[304] In Newman’s Lectures on Justification Lecture VIII. 
Section 6, there is a splendid passage expressive of this
aesthetic way of feeling the Christian scheme.  It is
unfortunately too long to quote.
It is much like the patriotic sentiment of those brought up in
ancient empires.  How many emotions must be frustrated of their
object, when one gives up the titles of dignity, the crimson
lights and blare of brass, the gold embroidery, the plumed
troops, the fear and trembling, and puts up with a president in a
black coat who shakes hands with you, and comes, it may be, from
a “home” upon a veldt or prairie with one sitting-room and a
Bible on its centre-table.  It pauperizes the monarchical
imagination!
The strength of these aesthetic sentiments makes it rigorously
impossible, it seems to me, that Protestantism, however superior
in spiritual profundity it may be to Catholicism, should at the
present day succeed in making many converts from the more
venerable ecclesiasticism.  The latter offers a so much richer
pasturage and shade to the fancy, has so many cells with so many
different kinds of honey, is so indulgent in its multiform
appeals to human nature, that Protestantism will always show to
Catholic eyes the almshouse physiognomy.  The bitter negativity
of it is to the Catholic mind incomprehensible.  To intellectual
Catholics many of the antiquated beliefs and practices to which
the Church gives countenance are, if taken literally, as childish
as they are to Protestants.  But they are childish in the
pleasing sense of “childlike"–innocent and amiable, and worthy
to be smiled on in consideration of the undeveloped condition of
the dear people’s intellects.  To the Protestant, on the
contrary, they are childish in the sense of being idiotic
falsehoods.  He must stamp out their delicate and lovable
redundancy, leaving the Catholic to shudder at his literalness. 
He appears to the latter as morose as if he were some hard-eyed,
numb, monotonous kind of reptile.  The two will never understand
each other–their centres of emotional energy are too different. 
Rigorous truth and human nature’s intricacies are always in need
of a mutual interpreter.[305] So much for the aesthetic
diversities in the religious consciousness.
[305] Compare the informality of Protestantism, where the “meek
lover of the good,” alone with his God, visits the sick, etc.,
for their own sakes, with the elaborate “business” that goes on
in Catholic devotion, and carries with it the social excitement
of all more complex businesses.  An essentially worldly-minded
Catholic woman can become a visitor of the sick on purely
coquettish principles, with her confessor and director, her
"merit” storing up, her patron saints, her privileged relation to
the Almighty, drawing his attention as a professional devote, her
definite “exercises,” and her definitely recognized social pose
in the organization.
In most books on religion, three things are represented as its
most essential elements.  These are Sacrifice, Confession, and
Prayer.  I must say a word in turn of each of these elements,
though briefly.  First of Sacrifice.
Sacrifices to gods are omnipresent in primeval worship; but, as
cults have grown refined, burnt offerings and the blood of
he-goats have been superseded by sacrifices more spiritual in
their nature.  Judaism, Islam, and Buddhism get along without
ritual sacrifice; so does Christianity, save in so far as the
notion is preserved in transfigured form in the mystery of
Christ’s atonement.  These religions substitute offerings of the
heart, renunciations of the inner self, for all those vain
oblations.  In the ascetic practices which Islam, Buddhism, and
the older Christianity encourage we see how indestructible is the
idea that sacrifice of some sort is a religious exercise.  In
lecturing on asceticism I spoke of its significance as symbolic
of the sacrifices which life, whenever it is taken strenuously,
calls for.[306]  But, as I said my say about those, and as these
lectures expressly avoid earlier religious usages and questions
of derivation, I will pass from the subject of Sacrifice
altogether and turn to that of Confession.
[306] Above, p. 354 ff.
In regard to Confession I will also be most brief, saying my word
about it psychologically, not historically.  Not nearly as
widespread as sacrifice, it corresponds to a more inward and
moral stage of sentiment.  It is part of the general system of
purgation and cleansing which one feels one’s self in need of, in
order to be in right relations to one’s deity.  For him who
confesses, shams are over and realities have begun; he has
exteriorized his rottenness.  If he has not actually got rid of
it, he at least no longer smears it over with a hypocritical show
of virtue–he lives at least upon a basis of veracity.  The
complete decay of the practice of confession in Anglo-Saxon
communities is a little hard to account for.  Reaction against
popery is of course the historic explanation, for in popery
confession went with penances and absolution, and other
inadmissible practices.  But on the <453> side of the sinner
himself it seems as if the need ought to have been too great to
accept so summary a refusal of its satisfaction.  One would think
that in more men the shell of secrecy would have had to open, the
pent-in abscess to burst and gain relief, even though the ear
that heard the confession were unworthy.  The Catholic church,
for obvious utilitarian reasons, has substituted auricular
confession to one priest for the more radical act of public
confession.  We English-speaking Protestants, in the general
self-reliance and unsociability of our nature, seem to find it
enough if we take God alone into our confidence.[307]
[307] A fuller discussion of confession is contained in the
excellent work by Frank Granger:  The Soul of a Christian,
London, 1900, ch. xii.
The next topic on which I must comment is Prayer–and this time
it must be less briefly.  We have heard much talk of late against
prayer, especially against prayers for better weather and for the
recovery of sick people.  As regards prayers for the sick, if any
medical fact can be considered to stand firm, it is that in
certain environments prayer may contribute to recovery, and
should be encouraged as a therapeutic measure.  Being a normal
factor of moral health in the person, its omission would be
deleterious.  The case of the weather is different. 
Notwithstanding the recency of the opposite belief,[308] every
one now knows that droughts and storms follow from physical
antecedents, and that moral appeals cannot avert them.  But
petitional prayer is only one department of prayer; and if we
take the word in the wider sense as meaning every kind of inward
communion or conversation with the power recognized as divine, we
can easily see that scientific criticism leaves it untouched.
[308] Example:  “The minister at Sudbury, being at the Thursday
lecture in Boston, heard the officiating clergyman praying for
rain.  As soon as the service was over, he went to the petitioner
and said ’You Boston ministers, as soon as a tulip wilts under
your windows, go to church and pray for rain, until all Concord
and Sudbury are under water.’”  R. W. Emerson:  Lectures and
Biographical Sketches, p. 363.
Prayer in this wide sense is the very soul and essence of
religion.  “Religion,” says a liberal French theologian, “is an
intercourse, a conscious and voluntary relation, entered into by
a soul in distress with the mysterious power upon which it feels
itself to depend, and upon which its fate is contingent.  This
intercourse with God is realized by prayer.  Prayer is religion
in act; that is, prayer is real religion.  It is prayer that
distinguishes the religious phenomenon from such similar or
neighboring phenomena as purely moral or aesthetic sentiment. 
Religion is nothing if it be not the vital act by which the
entire mind seeks to save itself by clinging to the principle
from which it draws its life.  This act is prayer, by which term
I understand no vain exercise of words, no mere repetition of
certain sacred formula, but the very movement itself of the soul,
putting itself in a personal relation of contact with the
mysterious power of which it feels the presence–it may be even
before it has a name by which to call it.  Wherever this interior
prayer is lacking, there is no religion; wherever, on the other
hand, this prayer rises and stirs the soul, even in the absence
of forms or of doctrines, we have living religion.  One sees from
this why “natural religion, so-called, is not properly a
religion.  It cuts man off from prayer.  It leaves him and God in
mutual remoteness, with no intimate commerce, no interior
dialogue, no interchange, no action of God in man, no return of
man to God.  At bottom this pretended religion is only a
philosophy.  Born at epochs of rationalism, of critical
investigations, it never was anything but an abstraction.  An
artificial and dead creation, it reveals to its examiner hardly
one of the characters proper to religion."[309]
[309] Auguste Sabatier:  Esquisse d’une Philosophie de la
Religion. 2me ed., 1897, pp. 24-26, abridged.
It seems to me that the entire series of our lectures proves the
truth of M. Sabatier’s contention.  The religious phenomenon,
studied as in Inner fact, and apart from ecclesiastical or
theological complications, has shown itself to consist
everywhere, and at all its stages, in the consciousness which
individuals have of an intercourse between themselves and higher
powers with which they feel themselves to be related. This
intercourse is realized at the time as being both active and
mutual.  If it be not effective; if it be not a give and take
relation; if nothing be really transacted while it lasts; if the
world is in no whit different for its having taken place; then
prayer, taken in this wide meaning of a sense that SOMETHING IS
TRANSACTING, is of course a feeling of what is illusory, and
religion must on the whole be classed, not simply as containing
elements of delusion–these undoubtedly everywhere exist–but as
being rooted in delusion altogether, just as materialists and
atheists have always said it was.  At most there might remain,
when the direct experiences of prayer were ruled out as false
witnesses, some inferential belief that the whole order of
existence must have a divine cause.  But this way of
contemplating nature, pleasing as it would doubtless be to
persons of a pious taste, would leave to them but the spectators’
part at a play, whereas in experimental religion and the
prayerful life, we seem ourselves to be actors, and not in a
play, but in a very serious reality.
The genuineness of religion is thus indissolubly bound up with
the question whether the prayerful consciousness be or be not
deceitful.  The conviction that something is genuinely transacted
in this consciousness is the very core of living religion.  As to
what is transacted, great differences of opinion have prevailed. 
The unseen powers have been supposed, and are yet supposed, to do
things which no enlightened man can nowadays believe in.  It may
well prove that the sphere of influence in prayer is subjective
exclusively, and that what is immediately changed is only the
mind of the praying person.  But however our opinion of prayer’s
effects may come to be limited by criticism, religion, in the
vital sense in which these lectures study it, must stand or fall
by the persuasion that effects of some sort genuinely do occur. 
Through prayer, religion insists, things which cannot be realized
in any other manner come about:  energy which but for prayer
would be bound is by prayer set free and operates in some part,
be it objective or subjective, of the world of facts.
This postulate is strikingly expressed in a letter written by the
late Frederic W. H. Myers to a friend, who allows me to quote
from it.  It shows how independent the prayer-instinct is of
usual doctrinal complications.  Mr. Myers writes:–
“I am glad that you have asked me about prayer, because I have
rather strong ideas on the subject.  First consider what are the
facts.  There exists around us a spiritual universe, and that
universe is in actual relation with the material.  From the
spiritual universe comes the energy which maintains the material;
the energy which makes the life of each individual spirit.  Our
spirits are supported by a perpetual indrawal of this energy, and
the vigor of that indrawal is perpetually changing, much as the
vigor of our absorption of material nutriment changes from hour
to hour.
“I call these ’facts’ because I think that some scheme of this
kind is the only one consistent with our actual evidence; too
complex to summarize here.  How, then, should we ACT on these
facts?  Plainly we must endeavor to draw in as much spiritual
life as possible, and we must place our minds in any attitude
which experience shows to be favorable to such indrawal.  PRAYER
is the general name for that attitude of open and earnest
expectancy.  If we then ask to whom to pray, the answer
(strangely enough) must be that THAT does not much matter.  The
prayer is not indeed a purely subjective thing;–it means a real
increase in intensity of absorption of spiritual power or
grace;–but we do not know enough of what takes place in the
spiritual world to know how the prayer operates;–WHO is
cognizant of it, or through what channel the grace is given. 
Better let children pray to Christ, who is at any rate the
highest individual spirit of whom we have any knowledge.  But it
would be rash to say that Christ himself HEARS US; while to say
that GOD hears us is merely to restate the first principle–that
grace flows in from the infinite spiritual world.”
Let us reserve the question of the truth or falsehood of the
belief that power is absorbed until the next lecture, when our
dogmatic conclusions, if we have any, must be reached. Let this
lecture still confine itself to the description of phenomena; and
as a concrete example of an extreme sort, of the way in which the
prayerful life may still be led, let me take a case with which
most of you must be acquainted, that of George Muller of Bristol,
who died in 1898.  Muller’s prayers were of the crassest
petitional order.  Early in life he resolved on taking certain
Bible promises in literal sincerity, and on letting himself be
fed, not by his own worldly foresight, but by the Lord’s hand. 
He had an extraordinarily active and successful career, among the
fruits of which were the distribution of over two million copies
of the Scripture text, in different languages; the equipment of
several hundred missionaries; the circulation of more than a
hundred and eleven million of scriptural books, pamphlets, and
tracts; the building of five large orphanages, and the keeping
and educating of thousands of orphans; finally, the establishment
of schools in which over a hundred and twenty-one thousand
youthful and adult pupils were taught. In the course of this work
Mr. Muller received and administered nearly a million and a half
of pounds sterling, and traveled over two hundred thousand miles
of sea and land.[310]  During the sixty-eight years of his
ministry, he never owned any property except his clothes and
furniture, and cash in hand; and he left, at the age of
eighty-six, an estate worth only a hundred and sixty pounds.
[310] My authority for these statistics is the little work on
Muller, by Frederic G. Warne, New York, 1898.
His method was to let his general wants be publicly known, but
not to acquaint other people with the details of his temporary
necessities.  For the relief of the latter, he prayed directly to
the Lord, believing that sooner or later prayers are always
answered if one have trust enough.  “When I lose such a thing as
a key,” he writes, “I ask the Lord to direct me to it, and I look
for an answer to my prayer; when a person with whom I have made
an appointment does not come, according to the fixed time, and I
begin to be inconvenienced by it, I ask the Lord to be pleased to
hasten him to me, and I look for an answer; when I do not
understand a passage of the word of God, I lift up my heart to
the Lord that he would be pleased by his Holy Spirit to instruct
me, and I expect to be taught, though I do not fix the time when,
and the manner how it should be; when I am going to minister in
the Word, I seek help from the Lord, and . . . am not cast down,
but of good cheer because I look for his assistance.”
Muller’s custom was to never run up bills, not even for a week. 
"As the Lord deals out to us by the day, . . . the week’s payment
might become due and we have no money to meet it; and thus those
with whom we deal might be inconvenienced by us, and we be found
acting against the commandment of the Lord:  ’Owe no man
anything.’ From this day and henceforward whilst the Lord gives
to us our supplies by the day, we purpose to pay at once for
every article as it is purchased, and never to buy anything
except we can pay for it at once, however much it may seem to be
needed, and however much those with whom we deal may wish to be
paid only by the week.”
The articles needed of which Muller speaks were the food, fuel,
etc., of his orphanages.  Somehow, near as they often come to
going without a meal, they hardly ever seem actually to have done
so.  “Greater and more manifest nearness of the Lord’s presence I
have never had than when after breakfast there were no means for
dinner for more than a hundred persons; or when after dinner
there were no means for the tea, and yet the Lord provided the
tea; and all this without one single human being having been
informed about our need. . . .  Through Grace my mind is so fully
assured of the faithfulness of the Lord, that in the midst of the
greatest need, I am enabled in peace to go about my other work. 
Indeed, did not the Lord give me this, which is the result of
trusting in him, I should scarcely be able to work at all; for it
is now comparatively a rare thing that a day comes when I am not
in need for one or another part of the work."[311]
[311] The Life of Trust; Being a Narrative of the Lord’s Dealings
with George Muller, New American edition, N. Y., Crowell, pp.
228, 194, 219.
In building his orphanages simply by prayer and faith, Muller
affirms that his prime motive was “to have something to point to
as a visible proof that our God and Father is the same faithful
God that he ever was–as willing as ever to prove himself the
living God, in our day as formerly, to all that put their trust
in him."[312]  For this reason he refused to borrow money for any
of his enterprises.  “How does it work when we thus anticipate
God by going our own way?  We certainly weaken faith instead of
increasing it; and each time we work thus a deliverance of our
own we find it more and more difficult to trust in God, till at
last we give way entirely to our natural fallen reason and
unbelief prevails.  How different if one is enabled to wait God’s
own time, and to look alone to him for help and deliverance! When
at last help comes, after many seasons of prayer it may be, how
sweet it is, and what a present recompense!  Dear Christian
reader, if you have never walked in this path of obedience
before, do so now, and you will then know experimentally the
sweetness of the joy which results from it."[313]
[312] Ibid., p. 126.
[313] Op. cit., p. 383, abridged.
When the supplies came in but slowly, Muller always considered
that this was for the trial of his faith and patience When his
faith and patience had been sufficiently tried, the Lord would
send more means.  “And thus it has proved,"–I quote from his
diary–"for to-day was given me the sum of 2050 pounds, of which
2000 are for the building fund [of a certain house], and 50 for
present necessities.  It is impossible to describe my joy in God
when I received this donation.  I was neither excited nor
surprised; for I LOOK out for answers to my prayers.  I BELIEVE
THAT GOD HEARS ME.  Yet my heart was so full of joy that I could
only SIT before God, and admire him, like David in 2 Samuel vii. 
At last I cast myself flat down upon my face and burst forth in
thanksgiving to God and in surrendering my heart afresh to him
for his blessed service."[314]
[314] Ibid., p. 323
George Muller’s is a case extreme in every respect, and in no
respect more so than in the extraordinary narrowness of the man’s
intellectual horizon.  His God was, as he often said, his
business partner.  He seems to have been for Muller little more
than a sort of supernatural clergyman interested in the
congregation of tradesmen and others in Bristol who were his
saints, and in the orphanages and other enterprises, but
unpossessed of any of those vaster and wilder and more ideal
attributes with which the human imagination elsewhere has
invested him.  Muller, in short, was absolutely unphilosophical. 
His intensely private and practical conception of his relations
with the Deity continued the traditions of the most primitive
human thought.[315]  When we compare a mind like his with such a
mind as, for example, Emerson’s or Phillips Brooks’s, we see the
range which the religious consciousness covers.
[315] I cannot resist the temptation of quoting an expression of
an even more primitive style of religious thought, which I find
in Arber’s English Garland, vol. vii. p. 440.  Robert Lyde, an
English sailor, along with an English boy, being prisoners on a
French ship in 1689, set upon the crew, of seven Frenchmen,
killed two, made the other five prisoners, and brought home the
ship.  Lyde thus describes how in this feat he found his God a
very present help in time of trouble:–
“With the assistance of God I kept my feet when they three and
one more did strive to throw me down.  Feeling the Frenchman
which hung about my middle hang very heavy, I said to the boy,
’Go round the binnacle, and knock down that man that hangeth on
my back.’  So the boy did strike him one blow on the head which
made him fall. . . . Then I looked about for a marlin spike or
anything else to strike them withal.  But seeing nothing, I said,
’LORD! what shall I do?’  Then casting up my eye upon my left
side, and seeing a marlin spike hanging, I jerked my right arm
and took hold, and struck the point four times about a quarter of
an inch deep into the skull of that man that had hold of my left
arm.  [One of the Frenchmen then hauled the marlin spike away
from him.]  But through GOD’S wonderful providence! it either
fell out of his hand, or else he threw it down, and at this time
the Almighty GOD gave me strength enough to take one man in one
hand, and throw at the other’s head:  and looking about again to
see anything to strike them withal, but seeing nothing, I said,
’LORD! what shall I do now?’  And then it pleased GOD to put me
in mind of my knife in my pocket.  And although two of the men
had hold of my right arm, yet GOD Almighty strengthened me so
that I put my right hand into my right pocket, drew out the knife
and sheath, . . . put it between my legs and drew it out, and
then cut the man’s throat with it that had his back to my breast: 
and he immediately dropt down, and scarce ever stirred after."–I
have slightly abridged Lyde’s narrative.
There is an immense literature relating to answers to petitional
prayer.  The evangelical journals are filled with such answers,
and books are devoted to the subject,[316] but for us Muller’s
case will suffice.
[316] As, for instance, In Answer to Prayer, by the Bishop of
Ripon and others, London, 1898; Touching Incidents and Remarkable
Answers to Prayer, Harrisburg, Pa., 1898 (?); H. L. Hastings: 
The Guiding Hand, or Providential Direction, illustrated by
Authentic Instances, Boston, 1898(?).
A less sturdy beggar-like fashion of leading the prayerful life
is followed by innumerable other Christians.  Persistence in
leaning on the Almighty for support and guidance will, such
persons say, bring with it proofs, palpable but much more subtle,
of his presence and active influence.  The following description
of a “led” life, by a German writer whom I have already quoted,
would no doubt appear to countless Christians in every country as
if transcribed from their own personal experience.  One finds in
this guided sort of life, says Dr. Hilty–
“That books and words (and sometimes people) come to one’s
cognizance just at the very moment in which one needs them; that
one glides over great dangers as if with shut eyes, remaining
ignorant of what would have terrified one or led one astray,
until the peril is past–this being especially the case with
temptations to vanity and sensuality; that paths on which one
ought not to wander are, as it were, hedged off with thorns; but
that on the other side great obstacles are suddenly removed; that
when the time has come for something, one suddenly receives a
courage that formerly failed, or perceives the root of a matter
that until then was concealed, or discovers thoughts, talents,
yea, even pieces of knowledge and insight, in one’s self, of
which it is impossible to say whence they come; finally, that
persons help us or decline to help us, favor us or refuse us, as
if they had to do so against their will, so that often those
indifferent or even unfriendly to us yield us the greatest
service and furtherance.  (God takes often their worldly goods,
from those whom he leads, at just the right moment, when they
threaten to impede the effort after higher interests.)
“Besides all this, other noteworthy things come to pass, of which
it is not easy to give account.  There is no doubt whatever that
now one walks continually through ’open doors’ and on the easiest
roads, with as little care and trouble as it is possible to
imagine.
“Furthermore one finds one’s self settling one’s affairs neither
too early nor too late, whereas they were wont to be spoiled by
untimeliness, even when the preparations had been well laid. In
addition to this, one does them with perfect tranquillity of
mind, almost as if they were matters of no consequence, like
errands done by us for another person, in which case we usually
act more calmly than when we act in our own concerns.  Again, one
finds that one can WAIT for everything patiently, and that is one
of life’s great arts.  One finds also that each thing comes duly,
one thing after the other, so that one gains time to make one’s
footing sure before advancing farther.  And then every thing
occurs to us at the right moment, just what we ought to do, etc.,
and often in a very striking way, just as if a third person were
keeping watch over those things which we are in easy danger of
forgetting.
“Often, too, persons are sent to us at the right time, to offer
or ask for what is needed, and what we should never have had the
courage or resolution to undertake of our own accord.
“Through all these experiences one finds that one is kindly and
tolerant of other people, even of such as are repulsive,
negligent, or ill-willed, for they also are instruments of good
in God’s hand, and often most efficient ones.  Without these
thoughts it would be hard for even the best of us always to keep
our equanimity.  But with the consciousness of divine guidance,
one sees many a thing in life quite differently from what would
otherwise be possible.
“All these are things that every human being KNOWS, who has had
experience of them; and of which the most speaking examples could
be brought forward.  The highest resources of worldly wisdom are
unable to attain that which, under divine leading, comes to us of
its own accord."[317]
[317] C. Hilty:  Gluck, Dritter Theil, 1900, pp. 92 ff.
Such accounts as this shade away into others where the belief is,
not that particular events are tempered more towardly to us by a
superintending providence, as a reward for our reliance, but that
by cultivating the continuous sense of our connection with the
power that made things as they are, we are tempered more towardly
for their reception.  The outward face of nature need not alter,
but the expressions of meaning in it alter.  It was dead and is
alive again. It is like the difference between looking on a
person without love, or upon the same person with love.  In the
latter case intercourse springs into new vitality.  So when one’s
affections keep in touch with the divinity of the world’s
authorship, fear and egotism fall away; and in the equanimity
that follows, one finds in the hours, as they succeed each other,
a series of purely benignant opportunities.  It is as if all
doors were opened, and all paths freshly smoothed.  We meet a new
world when we meet the old world in the spirit which this kind of
prayer infuses.
Such a spirit was that of Marcus Aurelius and Epictetus.[318]  It
is that of mind-curers, of the transcendentalists, and of the
so-called “liberal” Christians.  As an expression of it, I will
quote a page from one of Martineau’s sermons:–
[318] “Good Heaven!” says Epictetus, “any one thing in the
creation is sufficient to demonstrate a Providence, to a humble
and grateful mind.  The mere possibility of producing milk from
grass, cheese from milk, and wool from skins; who formed and
planned it?  Ought we not, whether we dig or plough or eat, to
sing this hymn to God?  Great is God, who has supplied us with
these instruments to till the ground; great is God, who has given
us hands and instruments of digestion, who has given us to grow
insensibly and to breathe in sleep.  These things we ought
forever to celebrate. . . . But because the most of you are
blind and insensible, there must be some one to fill this
station, and lead, in behalf of all men, the hymn to God; for
what else can I do, a lame old man, but sing hymns to God?  Were
I a nightingale, I would act the part of a nightingale; were I a
swan, the part of a swan.  But since I am a reasonable creature,
it is my duty to praise God . . . and I call on you to join the
same song.” Works, book i. ch. xvi., Carter-Higginson
(translation) abridged.
“The universe, open to the eye to-day, looks as it did a thousand
years ago:  and the morning hymn of Milton does but tell the
beauty with which our own familiar sun dressed the earliest
fields and gardens of the world.  We see what all our fathers
saw.  And if we cannot find God in your house or in mine, upon
the roadside or the margin of the sea; in the bursting seed or
opening flower; in the day duty or the night musing; in the
general laugh and the secret grief; in the procession of life,
ever entering afresh, and solemnly passing by and dropping off; I
do not think we should discern him any more on the grass of Eden,
or beneath the moonlight of Gethsemane.  Depend upon it, it is
not the want of greater miracles, but of the soul to perceive
such as are allowed us still, that makes us push all the
sanctities into the far spaces we cannot reach.  The devout feel
that wherever God’s hand is, THERE is miracle:  and it is simply
an indevoutness which imagines that only where miracle is, can
there be the real hand of God.  The customs of Heaven ought
surely to be more sacred in our eyes than its anomalies; the dear
old ways, of which the Most High is never tired, than the strange
things which he does not love well enough ever to repeat.  And he
who will but discern beneath the sun, as he rises any morning,
the supporting finger of the Almighty, may recover the sweet and
reverent surprise with which Adam gazed on the first dawn in
Paradise.  It is no outward change, no shifting in time or place;
but only the loving meditation of the pure in heart, that can
reawaken the Eternal from the sleep within our souls:  that can
render him a reality again, and reassert for him once more his
ancient name of ’the Living God.’"[319]
[319] James Martineau:  end of the sermon “Help Thou Mine
Unbelief,” in Endeavours after a Christian Life, 2d series. 
Compare with this page the extract from Voysey on p. 270, above,
and those from Pascal and Madame Guyon on p. 281.
When we see all things in God, and refer all things to him, we
read in common matters superior expressions of meaning.  The
deadness with which custom invests the familiar vanishes, and
existence as a whole appears transfigured. The state of a mind
thus awakened from torpor is well expressed in these words, which
I take from a friend’s letter:–
“If we occupy ourselves in summing up all the mercies and
bounties we are privileged to have, we are overwhelmed by their
number (so great that we can imagine ourselves unable to give
ourselves time even to begin to review the things we may imagine
WE HAVE NOT).  We sum them and realize that WE ARE ACTUALLY
KILLED WITH GOD’S KINDNESS; that we are surrounded by bounties
upon bounties, without which all would fall.  Should we not love
it; should we not feel buoyed up by the Eternal Arms?”
Sometimes this realization that facts are of divine sending,
instead of being habitual, is casual, like a mystical experience. 
Father Gratry gives this instance from his youthful melancholy
period:–
“One day I had a moment of consolation, because I met with
something which seemed to me ideally perfect.  It was a poor
drummer beating the tattoo in the streets of Paris.  I walked
behind him in returning to the school on the evening of a
holiday. His drum gave out the tattoo in such a way that, at that
moment at least, however peevish I were, I could find no pretext
for fault-finding.  It was impossible to conceive more nerve or
spirit, better time or measure, more clearness or richness, than
were in this drumming.  Ideal desire could go no farther in that
direction.  I was enchanted and consoled; the perfection of this
wretched act did me good.  Good is at least possible, I said.
since the ideal can thus sometimes get embodied."[320]
[320] Souvenirs de ma Jeunesse, 1897, p. 122.
In Senancour’s novel of Obermann a similar transient lifting of
the veil is recorded.  In Paris streets, on a March day, he comes
across a flower in bloom, a jonquil:
“It was the strongest expression of desire:  it was the first
perfume of the year.  I felt all the happiness destined for man.
This unutterable harmony of souls, the phantom of the ideal
world, arose in me complete.  I never felt anything so great or
so instantaneous.  I know not what shape, what analogy, what
secret of relation it was that made me see in this flower a
limitless beauty. . . .  I shall never inclose in a conception
this power, this immensity that nothing will express; this form
that nothing will contain; this ideal of a better world which one
feels, but which, it seems, nature has not made actual."[321]
[321] Op. cit., Letter XXX.
We heard in previous lectures of the vivified face of the world
as it may appear to converts after their awakening.[322] As a
rule, religious persons generally assume that whatever natural
facts connect themselves in any way with their destiny are
significant of the divine purposes with them. Through prayer
the purpose, often far from obvious, comes home to them, and if
it be “trial,” strength to endure the trial is given.  Thus at
all stages of the prayerful life we find the persuasion that in
the process of communion energy from on high flows in to meet
demand, and becomes operative within the phenomenal world.  So
long as this operativeness is admitted to be real, it makes no
essential difference whether its immediate effects be subjective
or objective. The fundamental religious point is that in prayer,
spiritual energy, which otherwise would slumber, does become
active, and spiritual work of some kind is effected really.
[322] Above, p. 243 ff.  Compare the withdrawal of expression
from the world, in Melancholiacs, p. 148.
So much for Prayer, taken in the wide sense of any kind of
communion.  As the core of religion, we must return to it in the
next lecture.
The last aspect of the religious life which remains for me to
touch upon is the fact that its manifestations so frequently
connect themselves with the subconscious part of our existence.
You may remember what I said in my opening lecture[323] about the
prevalence of the psychopathic temperament in religious
biography.  You will in point of fact hardly find a religious
leader of any kind in whose life there is no record of
automatisms.  I speak not merely of savage priests and prophets,
whose followers regard automatic utterance and action as by
itself tantamount to inspiration, I speak of leaders of thought
and subjects of intellectualized experience.  Saint Paul had his
visions, his ecstasies, his gift of tongues, small as was the
importance he attached to the latter. The whole array of
Christian saints and heresiarchs, including the greatest, the
Barnards, the Loyolas, the Luthers, the Foxes, the Wesleys, had
their visions, voices, rapt conditions, guiding impressions, and
"openings.”    They had these things, because they had exalted
sensibility, and to such things persons of exalted sensibility
are liable.  In such liability there lie, however, consequences
for theology.  Beliefs are strengthened wherever automatisms
corroborate them.  Incursions from beyond the transmarginal
region have a peculiar power to increase conviction.  The
inchoate sense of presence is infinitely stronger than
conception, but strong as it may be, it is seldom equal to the
evidence of hallucination.  Saints who actually see or hear their
Saviour reach the acme of assurance.  Motor automatisms, though
rarer, are, if possible, even more convincing than sensations. 
The subjects here actually feel themselves played upon by powers
beyond their will.  The evidence is dynamic; the God or spirit
moves the very organs of their body.[324]
[323] Above, pp. 25, 26.
[324] A friend of mine, a first-rate psychologist, who is a
subject of graphic automatism, tells me that the appearance of
independent actuation in the movements of his arm, when he writes
automatically, is so distinct that it obliges him to abandon a
psychophysical theory which he had previously believed in, the
theory, namely, that we have no feeling of the discharge
downwards of our voluntary motor-centres.  We must normally have
such a feeling, he thinks, or the SENSE OF AN ABSENCE would not
be so striking as it is in these experiences.  Graphic automatism
of a fully developed kind is rare in religious history, so far as
my knowledge goes.  Such statements as Antonia Bourignon’s, that
"I do nothing but lend my hand and spirit to another power than
mine,” is shown by the context to indicate inspiration rather
than directly automatic writing.  In some eccentric sects this
latter occurs.  The most striking instance of it is probably the
bulky volume called, “Oahspe, a new Bible in the Words of Jehovah
and his angel ambassadors,” Boston and London, 1891, written and
illustrated automatically by Dr. Newbrough of New York, whom I
understand to be now, or to have been lately, at the head of the
spiritistic community of Shalam in New Mexico.  The latest
automatically written book which has come under my notice is
"Zertouhem’s Wisdom of the Ages,” by George A. Fuller, Boston,
1901.
The great field for this sense of being the instrument of a
higher power is of course “inspiration.”  It is easy to
discriminate between the religious leaders who have been
habitually subject to inspiration and those who have not.  In the
teachings of the Buddha, of Jesus, of Saint Paul (apart from his
gift of tongues), of Saint Augustine, of Huss, of Luther, of
Wesley, automatic or semi-automatic composition appears to have
been only occasional.  In the Hebrew prophets, on the contrary,
in Mohammed, in some of the Alexandrians, in many minor Catholic
saints, in Fox, in Joseph Smith, something like it appears to
have been frequent, sometimes habitual.  We have distinct
professions of being under the direction of a foreign power, and
serving as its mouthpiece.  As regards the Hebrew prophets, it is
extraordinary, writes an author who has made a careful study of
them, to see–
“How, one after another, the same features are reproduced in the
prophetic books.  The process is always extremely different from
what it would be if the prophet arrived at his insight into
spiritual things by the tentative efforts of his own genius.
There is something sharp and sudden about it.  He can lay his
finger, so to speak, on the moment when it came.  And it always
comes in the form of an overpowering force from without, against
which he struggles, but in vain.  Listen, for instance, [to] the
opening of the book of Jeremiah.  Read through in like manner the
first two chapters of the prophecy of Ezekiel.
“It is not, however, only at the beginning of his career that the
prophet passes through a crisis which is clearly not self-
caused.  Scattered all through the prophetic writings are
expressions which speak of some strong and irresistible impulse
coming down upon the prophet, determining his attitude to the
events of his time, constraining his utterance, making his words
the vehicle of a higher meaning than their own.  For instance,
this of Isaiah’s:  ’The Lord spake thus to me with a strong
hand,’–an emphatic phrase which denotes the overmastering nature
of the impulse–’and instructed me that I should not walk in the
way of this people.’ . . . Or passages like this from Ezekiel: 
’The hand of the Lord God fell upon me,’ ’The hand of the Lord
was strong upon me.’ The one standing characteristic of the
prophet is that he speaks with the authority of Jehovah himself. 
Hence it is that the prophets one and all preface their addresses
so confidently, ’The Word of the Lord,’ or ’Thus saith the Lord.’
They have even the audacity to speak in the first person, as if
Jehovah himself were speaking.  As in Isaiah:  ’Hearken unto me,
O Jacob, and Israel my called; I am He, I am the First, I also am
the last,’–and so on.  The personality of the prophet sinks
entirely into the background; he feels himself for the time being
the mouthpiece of the Almighty."[325]
[325] W. Sanday:  The Oracles of God, London, 1892, pp. 49-56,
abridged.
“We need to remember that prophecy was a profession, and that the
prophets formed a professional class.  There were schools of the
prophets, in which the gift was regularly cultivated.  A group of
young men would gather round some commanding figure–a Samuel or
an Elisha–and would not only record or spread the knowledge of
his sayings and doings, but seek to catch themselves something of
his inspiration.  It seems that music played its part in their
exercises. . . .  It is perfectly clear that by no means all of
these Sons of the prophets ever succeeded in acquiring more than
a very small share in the gift which they sought.  It was clearly
possible to ’counterfeit’ prophecy.  Sometimes this was done
deliberately. . . .  But it by no means follows that in all cases
where a false message was given, the giver of it was altogether
conscious of what he was doing.[326]
[326] Op. cit., p. 91.  This author also cites Moses’s and
Isaiah’s commissions, as given in Exodus, chaps. iii. and iv.,
and Isaiah, chap. vi.
Here, to take another Jewish case, is the way in which Philo of
Alexandria describes his inspiration:–
“Sometimes, when I have come to my work empty, I have suddenly
become full; ideas being in an invisible manner showered upon me,
and implanted in me from on high; so that through the influence
of divine inspiration, I have become greatly excited, and have
known neither the place in which I was, nor those who were
present, nor myself, nor what I was saying, nor what I was
writing, for then I have been conscious of a richness of
interpretation, an enjoyment of light, a most penetrating
insight, a most manifest energy in all that was to be done;
having such effect on my mind as the clearest ocular
demonstration would have on the eyes."[327]
[327] Quoted by Augustus Clissold:  The Prophetic Spirit in
Genius and Madness, 1870, p. 67.  Mr. Clissold is a
Swedenborgian.  Swedenborg’s case is of course the palmary one of
audita et visa, serving as a basis of religious revelation.
If we turn to Islam, we find that Mohammed’s revelations all came
from the subconscious sphere.  To the question in what way he got
them–
“Mohammed is said to have answered that sometimes he heard a
knell as from a bell, and that this had the strongest effect on
him; and when the angel went away, he had received the
revelation.  Sometimes again he held converse with the angel as
with a man, so as easily to understand his words.  The later
authorities, however, . . . distinguish still other kinds.  In
the Itgan (103) the following are enumerated:  1, revelations
with sound of bell, 2, by inspiration of the holy spirit in M.’s
heart, 3, by Gabriel in human form, 4, by God immediately, either
when awake (as in his journey to heaven) or in dream. . . . In
Almawahib alladuniya the kinds are thus given:  1, Dream, 2,
Inspiration of Gabriel in the Prophet’s heart, 3, Gabriel taking
Dahya’s form, 4, with the bell-sound, etc., 5, Gabriel in propria
persona (only twice), 6, revelation in heaven, 7, God appearing
in person, but veiled, 8, God revealing himself immediately
without veil.  Others add two other stages, namely:  1, Gabriel
in the form of still another man, 2, God showing himself
personally in dream."[328]
[328] Noldeke, Geschichte des Qorans, 1860, p. 16.  Compare the
fuller account in Sir William Muir’s:  Life of Mahomet, 3d ed.,
1894, ch. iii.
In none of these cases is the revelation distinctly motor. In the
case of Joseph Smith (who had prophetic revelations innumerable
in addition to the revealed translation of the <472> gold plates
which resulted in the Book of Mormon), although there may have
been a motor element, the inspiration seems to have been
predominantly sensorial.  He began his translation by the aid of
the “peep-stones” which he found, or thought or said that he
found, with the gold plates –apparently a case of “crystal
gazing.”  For some of the other revelations he used the
peep-stones, but seems generally to have asked the Lord for more
direct instruction.[329]
[329] The Mormon theocracy has always been governed by direct
revelations accorded to the President of the Church and its
Apostles.  From an obliging letter written to me in 1899 by an
eminent Mormon, I quote the following extract:–
“It may be very interesting for you to know that the President
[Mr. Snow] of the Mormon Church claims to have had a number of
revelations very recently from heaven.  To explain fully what
these revelations are, it is necessary to know that we, as a
people, believe that the Church of Jesus Christ has again been
established through messengers sent from heaven.  This Church has
at its head a prophet seer, and revelator, who gives to man God’s
holy will.  Revelation is the means through which the will of God
is declared directly and in fullness to man.  These revelations
are got through dreams of sleep or in waking visions of the mind,
by voices without visional appearance or by actual manifestations
of the Holy Presence before the eye.  We believe that God has
come in person and spoken to our prophet and revelator.”
Other revelations are described as “openings"–Fox’s, for
example, were evidently of the kind known in spiritistic circles
of to-day as “impressions.”  As all effective initiators of
change must needs live to some degree upon this psychopathic
level of sudden perception or conviction of new truth, or of
impulse to action so obsessive that it must be worked off, I will
say nothing more about so very common a phenomenon.
When, in addition to these phenomena of inspiration, we take
religious mysticism into the account, when we recall the striking
and sudden unifications of a discordant self which we saw in
conversion, and when we review the extravagant obsessions of
tenderness, purity, and self-severity met with in saintliness, we
cannot, I think, avoid the conclusion that in religion we have a
department of human nature with unusually close relations to the
transmarginal or subliminal region.  If the word “subliminal” is
offensive to any of you, as smelling too much of psychical
research or other aberrations, call it by any other name you
please, to distinguish it from the level of full sunlit
consciousness.  Call this latter the A-region of personality, if
you care to, and call the other the B-region.  The B-region,
then, is obviously the larger part of each of us, for it is the
abode of everything that is latent and the reservoir of
everything that passes unrecorded or unobserved.  It contains,
for example, such things as all our momentarily inactive
memories, and it harbors the springs of all our obscurely motived
passions, impulses, likes, dislikes, and prejudices.  Our
intuitions, hypotheses, fancies, superstitions, persuasions,
convictions, and in general all our non-rational operations, come
from it.  It is the source of our dreams, and apparently they may
return to it.  In it arise whatever mystical experiences we may
have, and our automatisms, sensory or motor; our life in hypnotic
and “hypnoid” conditions, if we are subjects to such conditions;
our delusions, fixed ideas, and hysterical accidents, if we are
hysteric subjects; our supra-normal cognitions, if such there be,
and if we are telepathic subjects.  It is also the fountain-head
of much that feeds our religion. In persons deep in the religious
life, as we have now abundantly seen–and this is my
conclusion–the door into this region seems unusually wide open;
at any rate, experiences making their entrance through that door
have had emphatic influence in shaping religious history.
With this conclusion I turn back and close the circle which I
opened in my first lecture, terminating thus the review which I
then announced of inner religious phenomena as we find them in
developed and articulate human individuals.  I might easily, if
the time allowed, multiply both my documents and my
discriminations, but a broad treatment is, I believe, in itself
better, and the most important characteristics of the subject
lie, I think, before us already. In the next lecture, which is
also the last one, we must try to draw the critical conclusions
which so much material may suggest.
The material of our study of human nature is now spread before
us; and in this parting hour, set free from the duty of
description, we can draw our theoretical and practical
conclusions.  In my first lecture, defending the empirical
method, I foretold that whatever conclusions we might come to
could be reached by spiritual judgments only, appreciations of
the significance for life of religion, taken “on the whole.”   
Our conclusions cannot be as sharp as dogmatic conclusions would
be, but I will formulate them, when the time comes, as sharply as
I can.
Summing up in the broadest possible way the characteristics of
the religious life, as we have found them, it includes the
following beliefs:–
1.  That the visible world is part of a more spiritual universe
from which it draws its chief significance;
2.  That union or harmonious relation with that higher universe
is our true end;
3.  That prayer or inner communion with the spirit thereof– be
that spirit “God” or “law"–is a process wherein work is really
done, and spiritual energy flows in and produces effects,
psychological or material, within the phenomenal world.
Religion includes also the following psychological
characteristics:–
4.  A new zest which adds itself like a gift to life, and takes
the form either of lyrical enchantment or of appeal to
earnestness and heroism.
5.  An assurance of safety and a temper of peace, and, in
relation to others, a preponderance of loving affections.
In illustrating these characteristics by documents, we have been
literally bathed in sentiment.  In re-reading my manuscript, I am
almost appalled at the amount of emotionality which I find in it.
After so much of this, we can afford to be dryer and less
sympathetic in the rest of the work that lies before us.
The sentimentality of many of my documents is a consequence of
the fact that I sought them among the extravagances of the
subject.  If any of you are enemies of what our ancestors used to
brand as enthusiasm, and are, nevertheless, still listening to me
now, you have probably felt my selection to have been sometimes
almost perverse, and have wished I might have stuck to soberer
examples.  I reply that I took these extremer examples as
yielding the profounder information.  To learn the secrets of any
science, we go to expert specialists, even though they may be
eccentric persons, and not to commonplace pupils.  We combine
what they tell us with the rest of our wisdom, and form our final
judgment independently.  Even so with religion.  We who have
pursued such radical expressions of it may now be sure that we
know its secrets as authentically as anyone can know them who
learns them from another; and we have next to answer, each of us
for himself, the practical question:  what are the dangers in
this element of life?  and in what proportion may it need to be
restrained by other elements, to give the proper balance?
But this question suggests another one which I will answer
immediately and get it out of the way, for it has more than once
already vexed us.[330] Ought it to be assumed that in all men the
mixture of religion with other elements should be identical? 
Ought it, indeed, to be assumed that the lives of all men should
show identical religious elements?  In other words, is the
existence of so many religious types and sects and creeds
regrettable?
[330] For example, on pages 135, 160, 326 above.
To these questions I answer “No” emphatically.  And my reason is
that I do not see how it is possible that creatures in such
different positions and with such different powers as human
individuals are, should have exactly the same functions and the
same duties.  No two of us have identical difficulties, nor
should we be expected to work out identical solutions.  Each,
from his peculiar angle of observation, takes in a certain sphere
of fact and trouble, which each must deal with in a unique
manner.  One of us must soften himself, another must harden
himself; one must yield a point, another must stand firm–in
order the better to defend the position assigned him.  If an
Emerson were forced to be a Wesley, or a Moody forced to be a
Whitman, the total human consciousness of the divine would
suffer.  The divine can mean no single quality, it must mean a
group of qualities, by being champions of which in alternation,
different men may all find worthy missions.  Each attitude being
a syllable in human nature’s total message, it takes the whole of
us to spell the meaning out completely.  So a “god of battles"
must be allowed to be the god for one kind of person, a god of
peace and heaven and home, the god for another.  We must frankly
recognize the fact that we live in partial systems, and that
parts are not interchangeable in the spiritual life.  If we are
peevish and jealous, destruction of the self must be an element
of our religion; why need it be one if we are good and
sympathetic from the outset?  If we are sick souls, we require a
religion of deliverance; but why think so much of deliverance, if
we are healthy-minded?[331]  Unquestionably, some men have the 
completer experience and the higher vocation, here just as in the
social world; but for each man to stay in his own experience,
whate’er it be, and for others to tolerate him there, is surely
best.
[331] From this point of view, the contrasts between the healthy
and the morbid mind, and between the once-born and the twice-born
types, of which I spoke in earlier lectures (see pp. 159-164),
cease to be the radical antagonisms which many think them.  The
twice-born look down upon the rectilinear consciousness of life
of the once-born as being “mere morality,” and not properly
religion.  “Dr. Channing,” an orthodox minister is reported to
have said, “is excluded from the highest form of religious life
by the extraordinary rectitude of his character.”  It is indeed
true that the outlook upon life of the twice-born–holding as it
does more of the element of evil in solution–is the wider and
completer.  The “heroic” or “solemn” way in which life comes to
them is a “higher synthesis” into which healthy- mindedness and
morbidness both enter and combine.  Evil is not evaded, but
sublated in the higher religious cheer of these persons (see pp.
47-52, 354-357).  But the final consciousness which each type
reaches of union with the divine has the same practical
significance for the individual; and individuals may well be
allowed to get to it by the channels which lie most open to their
several temperaments.  In the cases which were quoted in Lecture
IV, of the mind-cure form of healthy-mindedness, we found
abundant examples of regenerative process.  The severity of the
crisis in this process is a matter of degree.  How long one shall
continue to drink the consciousness of evil, and when one shall
begin to short-circuit and get rid of it, are also matters of
amount and degree, so that in many instances it is quite
arbitrary whether we class the individual as a once-born or a
twice-born subject.
But, you may now ask, would not this one-sidedness be cured if we
should all espouse the science of religions as our own religion? 
In answering this question I must open again the general
relations of the theoretic to the active life.
Knowledge about a thing is not the thing itself.  You remember
what Al-Ghazzali told us in the Lecture on Mysticism–that to
understand the causes of drunkenness, as a physician understands
them, is not to be drunk.  A science might come to understand
everything about the causes and elements of religion, and might
even decide which elements were qualified, by their general
harmony with other branches of knowledge, to be considered true;
and yet the best man at this science might be the man who found
it hardest to be personally devout.  Tout savoir c’est tout
pardonner.  The name of Renan would doubtless occur to many
persons as an example of the way in which breadth of knowledge
may make one only a dilettante in possibilities, and blunt the
acuteness of one’s living faith.[332]  If religion be a function
by which either God’s cause or man’s cause is to be really
advanced, then he who lives the life of it, however narrowly, is
a better servant than he who merely knows about it, however much. 
Knowledge about life is one thing; effective occupation of a
place in life, with its dynamic currents passing through your
being, is another.
[332] Compare, e.g., the quotation from Renan on p. 37, above.
For this reason, the science of religions may not be an
equivalent for living religion; and if we turn to the inner
difficulties of such a science, we see that a point comes when
she must drop the purely theoretic attitude, and either let her
knots remain uncut, or have them cut by active faith.  To see
this, suppose that we have our science of religions constituted
as a matter of fact.  Suppose that she has assimilated all the
necessary historical material and distilled out of it as its
essence the same conclusions which I myself a few moments ago
pronounced.  Suppose that she agrees that religion, wherever it
is an active thing, involves a belief in ideal presences, and a
belief that in our prayerful communion with them,[333] work is
done, and something real comes to pass.  She has now to exert her
critical activity, and to decide how far, in the light of other
sciences and in that of general philosophy, such beliefs can be
considered TRUE.
[333] “Prayerful” taken in the broader sense explained above on
pp. 453 ff.
Dogmatically to decide this is an impossible task.  Not only are
the other sciences and the philosophy still far from being
completed, but in their present state we find them full of
conflicts.  The sciences of nature know nothing of spiritual
presences, and on the whole hold no practical commerce whatever
with the idealistic conceptions towards which general philosophy
inclines.  The scientist, so-called, is, during his scientific
hours at least, so materialistic that one may well say that on
the whole the influence of science goes against the notion that
religion should be recognized at all.  And this antipathy to
religion finds an echo within the very science of religions
itself.  The cultivator of this science has to become acquainted
with so many groveling and horrible superstitions that a
presumption easily arises in his mind that any belief that is
religious probably is false.  In the “prayerful communion” of
savages with such mumbo-jumbos of deities as they acknowledge, it
is hard for us to see what genuine spiritual work–even though it
were work relative only to their dark savage obligations– can
possibly be done.
The consequence is that the conclusions of the science of
religions are as likely to be adverse as they are to be favorable
to the claim that the essence of religion is true.  There is a
notion in the air about us that religion is probably only an
anachronism, a case of “survival,” an atavistic relapse into a
mode of thought which humanity in its more enlightened examples
has outgrown; and this notion our religious anthropologists at
present do little to counteract.
This view is so widespread at the present day that I must
consider it with some explicitness before I pass to my own
conclusions.  Let me call it the “Survival theory,” for brevity’s
sake.
The pivot round which the religious life, as we have traced it,
revolves, is the interest of the individual in his private
personal destiny.  Religion, in short, is a monumental chapter in
the history of human egotism.  The gods believed in–whether by
crude savages or by men disciplined intellectually–agree with
each other in recognizing personal calls.  Religious thought is
carried on in terms of personality, this being, in the world of
religion, the one fundamental fact.  To-day, quite as much as at
any previous age, the religious individual tells you that the
divine meets him on the basis of his personal concerns.
Science, on the other hand, has ended by utterly repudiating the
personal point of view.  She catalogues her elements and records
her laws indifferent as to what purpose may be shown forth by
them, and constructs her theories quite careless of their bearing
on human anxieties and fates. Though the scientist may
individually nourish a religion, and be a theist in his
irresponsible hours, the days are over when it could be said that
for Science herself the heavens declare the glory of God and the
firmament showeth his handiwork.  Our solar system, with its
harmonies, is seen now as but one passing case of a certain sort
of moving equilibrium in the heavens, realized by a local
accident in an appalling wilderness of worlds where no life can
exist. In a span of time which as a cosmic interval will count
but as an hour, it will have ceased to be.  The Darwinian notion
of chance production, and subsequent destruction, speedy or
deferred, applies to the largest as well as to the smallest
facts.  It is impossible, in the present temper of the scientific
imagination, to find in the driftings of the cosmic atoms,
whether they work on the universal or on the particular scale,
anything but a kind of aimless weather, doing and undoing,
achieving no proper history, and leaving no result. Nature has no
one distinguishable ultimate tendency with which it is possible
to feel a sympathy.  In the vast rhythm of her processes, as the
scientific mind now follows them, she appears to cancel herself. 
The books of natural theology which satisfied the intellects of
our grandfathers seem to us quite grotesque,[334] representing,
as they did, a God who conformed the largest things of nature to
the paltriest of our private wants.  The God whom science
recognizes must be a God of universal laws exclusively, a God who
does a wholesale, not a retail business.  He cannot accommodate
his processes to the convenience of individuals.  The bubbles on
the foam which coats a stormy sea are floating episodes, made and
unmade by the forces of the wind and water.  Our private selves
are like those bubbles–epiphenomena, as Clifford, I believe,
ingeniously called them; their destinies weigh nothing and
determine nothing in the world’s irremediable currents of events.
[334] How was it ever conceivable, we ask, that a man like
Christian Wolff, in whose dry-as-dust head all the learning of
the early eighteenth century was concentrated, should have
preserved such a baby-like faith in the personal and human
character of Nature as to expound her operations as he did in his
work on the uses of natural things?  This, for example, is the
account he gives of the sun and its utility:–
“We see that God has created the sun to keep the changeable
conditions on the earth in such an order that living creatures,
men and beasts, may inhabit its surface.  Since men are the most
reasonable of creatures, and able to infer God’s invisible being
from the contemplation of the world, the sun in so far forth
contributes to the primary purpose of creation:  without it the
race of man could not be preserved or continued. . . . The sun
makes daylight, not only on our earth, but also on the other
planets; and daylight is of the utmost utility to us, for by its
means we can commodiously carry on those occupations which in the
night-time would either be quite impossible.  Or at any rate
impossible without our going to the expense of artificial light. 
The beasts of the field can find food by day which they would not
be able to find at night.  Moreover we owe it to the sunlight
that we are able to see everything that is on the earth’s
surface, not only near by, but also at a distance, and to
recognize both near and far things according to their species,
which again is of manifold use to us not only in the business
necessary to human life, and when we are traveling, but also for
the scientific knowledge of Nature, which knowledge for the most
part depends on observations made with the help of sight, and
without the sunshine, would have been impossible.  If any one
would rightly impress on his mind the great advantages which he
derives from the sun, let him imagine himself living through only
one month, and see how it would be with all his undertakings, if
it were not day but night.  He would then be sufficiently
convinced out of his own experience, especially if he had much
work to carry on in the street or in the fields. . . . From the
sun we learn to recognize when it is midday, and by knowing this
point of time exactly, we can set our clocks right, on which
account astronomy owes much to the sun. . . . By help of the sun
one can find the meridian. . . . But the meridian is the basis
of our sun-dials, and generally speaking, we should have no
sun-dials if we had no sun.” Vernunftige Gedanken von den
Absichter der naturlichen Dinge, 1782. pp.74-84.
Or read the account of God’s beneficence in the institution of
"the great variety throughout the world of men’s faces, voices,
and hand-writing,” given in Derham’s Physico-theology, a book
that had much vogue in the eighteenth century.  “Had Man’s body,"
says Dr. Derham, “been made according to any of the Atheistical
Schemes, or any other Method than that of the infinite Lord of
the World, this wise Variety would never have been:  but Men’s
Faces would have been cast in the same, or not a very different
Mould, their Organs of Speech would have sounded the same or not
so great a Variety of Notes, and the same Structure of Muscles
and Nerves would have given the Hand the same Direction in
Writing.  And in this Case what Confusion, what Disturbance, what
Mischiefs would the world eternally have lain under!  No Security
could have been to our persons; no Certainty, no Enjoyment of our
Possessions; no Justice between Man and Man, no Distinction
between Good and Bad, between Friends and Foes, between Father
and Child, Husband and Wife, Male or Female; but all would have
been turned topsy-turvy, by being exposed to the Malice of the
Envious and ill-Natured, to the Fraud and Violence of Knaves and
Robbers, to the Forgeries of the crafty Cheat, to the Lusts of
the Effeminate and Debauched, and what not!  Our Courts of
Justice can abundantly testify the dire Effects of Mistaking
Men’s Faces, of counterfeiting their Hands, and forging Writings.
But now as the infinitely wise Creator and Ruler hath ordered the
Matter, every man’s Face can distinguish him in the Light, and
his Voice in the Dark, his Hand-writing can speak for him though
absent, and be his Witness, and secure his Contracts in future
Generations.  A manifest as well as admirable Indication of the
divine Superintendence and Management.”
A God so careful as to make provision even for the unmistakable
signing of bank checks and deeds was a deity truly after the
heart of eighteenth century Anglicanism.
I subjoin, omitting the capitals, Derham’s “Vindication of God by
the Institution of Hills and Valleys,” and Wolff’s altogether
culinary account of the institution of Water:–
“The uses,” says Wolff, “which water serves in human life are
plain to see and need not be described at length.  Water is a
universal drink of man and beasts.  Even though men have made
themselves drinks that are artificial, they could not do this
without water.  Beer is brewed of water and malt, and it is the
water in it which quenches thirst.  Wine is prepared from grapes,
which could never have grown without the help of water; and the
same is true of those drinks which in England and other places
they produce from fruit. . . . Therefore since God so planned the
world that men and beasts should live upon it and find there
everything required for their necessity and convenience, he also
made water as one means whereby to make the earth into so
excellent a dwelling.  And this is all the more manifest when we
consider the advantages which we obtain from this same water for
the cleaning of our household utensils, of our clothing, and of
other matters. . . . When one goes into a grinding-mill one sees
that the grindstone must always be kept wet and then one will get
a still greater idea of the use of water.”
Of the hills and valleys, Derham, after praising their beauty,
discourses as follows:  “Some constitutions are indeed of so
happy a strength, and so confirmed an health, as to be
indifferent to almost any place or temperature of the air.  But
then others are so weakly and feeble, as not to be able to bear
one, but can live comfortably in another place.  With some the
more subtle and finer air of the hills doth best agree, who are
languishing and dying in the feculent and grosser air of great
towns, or even the warmer and vaporous air of the valleys and
waters.  But contrariwise, others languish on the hills, and grow
lusty and strong in the warmer air of the valleys.
“So that this opportunity of shifting our abode from the hills to
the vales, is an admirable easement, refreshment, and great
benefit to the valetudinarian, feeble part of mankind; affording
those an easy and comfortable life, who would otherwise live
miserably, languish, and pine away.
“To this salutary conformation of the earth we may add another
great convenience of the hills, and that is affording commodious
places for habitation, serving (as an eminent author wordeth it)
as screens to keep off the cold and nipping blasts of the
northern and easterly winds, and reflecting the benign and
cherishing sunbeams and so rendering our habitations both more
comfortable and more cheerly in winter.
“Lastly, it is to the hills that the fountains owe their rise and
the rivers their conveyance, and consequently those vast masses
and lofty piles are not, as they are charged such rude and
useless excrescences of our ill-formed globe; but the admirable
tools of nature, contrived and ordered by the infinite Creator,
to do one of its most useful works.  For, was the surface of the
earth even and level, and the middle parts of its islands and
continents not mountainous and high as now it is, it is most
certain there could be no descent for the rivers, no conveyance
for the waters; but, instead of gliding along those gentle
declivities which the higher lands now afford them quite down to
the sea, they would stagnate and perhaps stink, and also drown
large tracts of land.
“[Thus] the hills and vales, though to a peevish and weary
traveler they may seem incommodious and troublesome, yet are a
noble work of the great Creator, and wisely appointed by him for
the good of our sublunary world.”  
You see how natural it is, from this point of view, to treat
religion as a mere survival, for religion does in fact perpetuate
the traditions of the most primeval thought.  To coerce the
spiritual powers, or to square them and get them on our side,
was, during enormous tracts of time, the one great object in our
dealings with the natural world.  For our ancestors, dreams,
hallucinations, revelations, and cock-and-bull stories were
inextricably mixed with facts.  Up to a comparatively recent date
such distinctions as those between what has been verified and
what is only conjectured, between the impersonal and the personal
aspects of existence, were hardly suspected or conceived. 
Whatever you imagined in a lively manner, whatever you thought
fit to be true, you affirmed confidently; and whatever you
affirmed, your comrades believed.  Truth was what had not yet
been contradicted, most things were taken into the mind from the
point of view of their human suggestiveness, and the attention
confined itself exclusively to the aesthetic and dramatic aspects
of events.[335]
[335] Until the seventeenth century this mode of thought
prevailed. One need only recall the dramatic treatment even of
mechanical questions by Aristotle, as, for example, his
explanation of the power of the lever to make a small weight
raise a larger one.  This is due, according to Aristotle, to the
generally miraculous character of the circle and of all circular
movement.  The circle is both convex and concave; it is made by a
fixed point and a moving line, which contradict each other; and
whatever moves in a circle moves in opposite directions. 
Nevertheless, movement in a circle is the most “natural"
movement; and the long arm of the lever, moving, as it does, in
the larger circle, has the greater amount of this natural motion,
and consequently requires the lesser force.  Or recall the
explanation by Herodotus of the position of the sun in winter: 
It moves to the south because of the cold which drives it into
the warm parts of the heavens over Libya.  Or listen to Saint
Augustine’s speculations:  “Who gave to chaff such power to
freeze that it preserves snow buried under it, and such power to
warm that it ripens green fruit?  Who can explain the strange
properties of fire itself, which blackens all that it burns,
though itself bright, and which, though of the most beautiful
colors, discolors almost all that it touches and feeds upon, and
turns blazing fuel into grimy cinders? . . . Then what wonderful
properties do we find in charcoal, which is so brittle that a
light tap breaks it, and a slight pressure pulverizes it, and yet
is so strong that no moisture rots it, nor any time causes it to
decay.”  City of God, book xxi, ch. iv.
Such aspects of things as these, their naturalness and
unnaturalness the sympathies and antipathies of their superficial
qualities, their eccentricities, their brightness and strength
and destructiveness, were inevitably the ways in which they
originally fastened our attention.
If you open early medical books, you will find sympathetic magic
invoked on every page.  Take, for example, the famous vulnerary
ointment attributed to Paracelsus.  For this there were a variety
of receipts, including usually human fat, the fat of either a
bull, a wild boar, or a bear, powdered earthworms, the usnia, or
mossy growth on the weathered skull of a hanged criminal, and
other materials equally unpleasant–the whole prepared under the
planet Venus if possible, but never under Mars or Saturn.  Then,
if a splinter of wood, dipped in the patient’s blood, or the
bloodstained weapon that wounded him, be immersed in this
ointment, the wound itself being tightly bound up, the latter
infallibly gets well–I quote now Van Helmont’s account–for the
blood on the weapon or splinter, containing in it the spirit of
the wounded man, is roused to active excitement by the contact of
the ointment, whence there results to it a full commission or
power to cure its cousin-german the blood in the patient’s body. 
This it does by sucking out the dolorous and exotic impression
from the wounded part.  But to do this it has to implore the aid
of the bull’s fat, and other portions of the unguent.  The reason
why bull’s fat is so powerful is that the bull at the time of
slaughter is full of secret reluctancy and vindictive murmurs,
and therefore dies with a higher flame of revenge about him than
any other animal.  And thus we have made it out, says this
author, that the admirable efficacy of the ointment ought to be
imputed, not to any auxiliary concurrence of Satan, but simply to
the energy of the posthumous character of Revenge remaining
firmly impressed upon the blood and concreted fat in the unguent. 
J. B. Van Helmont:  A Ternary of Paradoxes, translated by Walter
Charleton, London, 1650.–I much abridge the original in my
citations.
The author goes on to prove by the analogy of many other natural
facts that this sympathetic action between things at a distance
is the true rationale of the case.  “If,” he says, “the heart of
a horse slain by a witch, taken out of the yet reeking carcase,
be impaled upon an arrow and roasted, immediately the whole witch
becomes tormented with the insufferable pains and cruelty of the
fire, which could by no means happen unless there preceded a
conjunction of the spirit of the witch with the spirit of the
horse.  In the reeking and yet panting heart, the spirit of the
witch is kept captive, and the retreat of it prevented by the
arrow transfixed.  Similarly hath not many a murdered carcase at
the coroner’s inquest suffered a fresh haemorrhage or cruentation
at the presence of the assassin?–the blood being, as in a
furious fit of anger, enraged and agitated by the impress of
revenge conceived against the murderer, at the instant of the
soul’s compulsive exile from the body.  So, if you have dropsy,
gout, or jaundice, by including some of your warm blood in the
shell and white of an egg, which, exposed to a gentle heat, and
mixed with a bait of flesh, you shall give to a hungry dog or
hog, the disease shall instantly pass from you into the animal,
and leave you entirely.  And similarly again, if you burn some of
the milk either of a cow or of a woman, the gland from which it
issued will dry up.  A gentleman at Brussels had his nose mowed
off in a combat, but the celebrated surgeon Tagliacozzus digged a
new nose for him out of the skin of the arm of a porter at
Bologna.  About thirteen months after his return to his own
country, the engrafted nose grew cold, putrefied, and in a few
days dropped off, and it was then discovered that the porter had
expired, near about the same punctilio of time.  There are still
at Brussels eye-witnesses of this occurrence,” says Van Helmont;
and adds, “I pray what is there in this of superstition or of
exalted imagination?”
Modern mind-cure literature–the works of Prentice Mulford, for
example–is full of sympathetic magic. 
How indeed could it be otherwise?  The extraordinary value, for
explanation and prevision, of those mathematical and mechanical
modes of conception which science uses, was a result that could
not possibly have been expected in advance.  Weight, movement,
velocity, direction, position, what thin, pallid, uninteresting
ideas!  How could the richer animistic aspects of Nature, the
peculiarities and oddities that make phenomena picturesquely
striking or expressive, fail to have been first singled out and
followed by philosophy as the more promising avenue to the
knowledge of Nature’s life?  Well, it is still in these richer
animistic and dramatic aspects that religion delights to dwell. 
It is the terror and beauty of phenomena, the “promise” of the
dawn and of the rainbow, the “voice” of the thunder, the
"gentleness” of the summer rain, the “sublimity” of the stars,
and not the physical laws which these things follow, by which the
religious mind still continues to be most impressed; and just as
of yore, the devout man tells you that in the solitude of his
room or of the fields he still feels the divine presence, that
inflowings of help come in reply to his prayers, and that
sacrifices to this unseen reality fill him with security and
peace.
Pure anachronism! says the survival-theory;–anachronism for
which deanthropomorphization of the imagination is the remedy
required.  The less we mix the private with the cosmic, the more
we dwell in universal and impersonal terms, the truer heirs of
Science we become.
In spite of the appeal which this impersonality of the scientific
attitude makes to a certain magnanimity of temper, I believe it
to be shallow, and I can now state my reason in comparatively few
words.  That reason is that, so long as we deal with the cosmic
and the general, we deal only with the symbols of reality, but as
soon as we deal with private and personal phenomena as such, we
deal with realities in the completest sense of the term.  I think
I can easily make clear what I mean by these words.
The world of our experience consists at all times of two parts,
an objective and a subjective part, of which the former may be
incalculably more extensive than the latter, and yet the latter
can never be omitted or suppressed.  The objective part is the
sum total of whatsoever at any given time we may be thinking of,
the subjective part is the inner “state” in which the thinking
comes to pass.  What we think of may be enormous–the cosmic
times and spaces, for example– whereas the inner state may be
the most fugitive and paltry activity of mind.  Yet the cosmic
objects, so far as the experience yields them, are but ideal
pictures of something whose existence we do not inwardly possess
but only point at outwardly, while the inner state is our very
experience itself; its reality and that of our experience are
one.  A conscious field PLUS its object as felt or thought of
PLUS an attitude towards the object PLUS the sense of a self to
whom the attitude belongs–such a concrete bit of personal
experience may be a small bit, but it is a solid bit as long as
it lasts; not hollow, not a mere abstract element of experience,
such as the “object” is when taken all alone.  It is a FULL fact,
even though it be an insignificant fact; it is of the KIND to
which all realities whatsoever must belong; the motor currents of
the world run through the like of it; it is on the line
connecting real events with real events.  That unsharable feeling
which each one of us has of the pinch of his individual destiny
as he privately feels it rolling out on fortune’s wheel may be
disparaged for its egotism, may be sneered at as unscientific,
but it is the one thing that fills up the measure of our concrete
actuality, and any would-be existent that should lack such a
feeling, or its analogue, would be a piece of reality only half
made up.[336]
[336] Compare Lotze’s doctrine that the only meaning we can
attach to the notion of a thing as it is “in itself” is by
conceiving it as it is FOR itself, i.e., as a piece of full
experience with a private sense of “pinch” or inner activity of
some sort going with it.
If this be true, it is absurd for science to say that the
egotistic elements of experience should be suppressed.  The axis
of reality runs solely through the egotistic places–they are
strung upon it like so many beads.  To describe the world with
all the various feelings of the individual pinch of destiny, all
the various spiritual attitudes, left out from the
description–they being as describable as anything else –would
be something like offering a printed bill of fare as the
equivalent for a solid meal.  Religion makes no such blunder. 
The individual’s religion may be egotistic, and those private
realities which it keeps in touch with may be narrow enough; but
at any rate it always remains infinitely less hollow and
abstract, as far as it goes, than a science which prides itself
on taking no account of anything private at all.
A bill of fare with one real raisin on it instead of the word
"raisin,” with one real egg instead of the word “egg,” might be
an inadequate meal, but it would at least be a commencement of
reality.  The contention of the survival-theory that we ought to
stick to non-personal elements exclusively seems like saying that
we ought to be satisfied forever with reading the naked bill of
fare.  I think, therefore, that however particular questions
connected with our individual destinies may be answered, it is
only by acknowledging them as genuine questions, and living in
the sphere of thought which they open up, that we become
profound.  But to live thus is to be religious; so I
unhesitatingly repudiate the survival-theory of religion, as
being founded on an egregious mistake.  It does not follow,
because our ancestors made so many errors of fact and mixed them
with their religion, that we should therefore leave off being
religious at all.[337]  By being religious we establish ourselves
in possession of ultimate reality at the only points at which
reality is given us to guard.  Our responsible concern is with
our private destiny, after all.
[337] Even the errors of fact may possibly turn out not to be as
wholesale as the scientist assumes.  We saw in Lecture IV how the
religious conception of the universe seems to many mind-curers
"verified” from day to day by their experience of fact. 
"Experience of fact” is a field with so many things in it that
the sectarian scientist methodically declining, as he does, to
recognize such “facts” as mind-curers and others like them
experience, otherwise than by such rude heads of classification
as “bosh,” “rot,” “folly,” certainly leaves out a mass of raw
fact which, save for the industrious interest of the religious in
the more personal aspects of reality, would never have succeeded
in getting itself recorded at all.  We know this to be true
already in certain cases; it may, therefore, be true in others as
well.  Miraculous healings have always been part of the
supernaturalist stock in trade, and have always been dismissed by
the scientist as figments of the imagination.  But the
scientist’s tardy education in the facts of hypnotism has
recently given him an apperceiving mass for phenomena of this
order, and he consequently now allows that the healings may
exist, provided you expressly call them effects of “suggestion.” 
Even the stigmata of the cross on Saint Francis’s hands and feet
may on these terms not be a fable.  Similarly, the time-honored
phenomenon of diabolical possession is on the point of being
admitted by the scientist as a fact, now that he has the name of
"hystero-demonopathy” by which to apperceive it.  No one can
foresee just how far this legitimation of occultist phenomena
under newly found scientist titles may proceed–even “prophecy,"
even “levitation,” might creep into the pale.
Thus the divorce between scientist facts and religious facts may
not necessarily be as eternal as it at first sight seems, nor the
personalism and romanticism of the world, as they appeared to
primitive thinking, be matters so irrevocably outgrown.  The
final human opinion may, in short, in some manner now impossible
to foresee, revert to the more personal style, just as any path
of progress may follow a spiral rather than a straight line.  If
this were so, the rigorously impersonal view of science might one
day appear as having been a temporarily useful eccentricity
rather than the definitively triumphant position which the
sectarian scientist at present so confidently announces it to be.
You see now why I have been so individualistic throughout these
lectures, and why I have seemed so bent on rehabilitating the
element of feeling in religion and subordinating its intellectual
part.  Individuality is founded in feeling; and the recesses of
feeling, the darker, blinder strata of character, are the only
places in the world in which we catch real fact in the making,
and directly perceive how events happen, and how work is actually
done.[338]  Compared with this world of living individualized
feelings, the world of generalized objects which the intellect
contemplates is without solidity or life.  As in stereoscopic or
kinetoscopic pictures seen outside the instrument, the third
dimension, the movement, the vital element, are not there.  We
get a beautiful picture of an express train supposed to be
moving, but where in the picture, as I have heard a friend say,
is the energy or the fifty miles an hour?[339]
[338] Hume’s criticism has banished causation from the world of
physical objects, and “Science” is absolutely satisfied to define
cause in terms of concomitant change-read Mach, Pearson, Ostwald.
The “original” of the notion of causation is in our inner
personal experience, and only there can causes in the
old-fashioned sense be directly observed and described.
[339] When I read in a religious paper words like these: 
"Perhaps the best thing we can say of God is that he is THE
INEVITABLE INFERENCE,” I recognize the tendency to let religion
evaporate in intellectual terms.  Would martyrs have sung in the
flames for a mere inference, however inevitable it might be? 
Original religious men, like Saint Francis, Luther, Behmen, have
usually been enemies of the intellect’s pretension to meddle with
religious things.  Yet the intellect, everywhere invasive, shows
everywhere its shallowing effect.  See how the ancient spirit of
Methodism evaporates under those wonderfully able rationalistic
booklets (which every one should read) of a philosopher like
Professor Bowne (The Christian Revelation, The Christian Life The
Atonement:  Cincinnati and New York, 1898, 1899, 1900).  See the
positively expulsive purpose of philosophy properly so called:–
“Religion,” writes M.  Vacherot (La Religion, Paris, 1869, pp.
313, 436, et passim), “answers to a transient state or condition,
not to a permanent determination of human nature, being merely an
expression of that stage of the human mind which is dominated by
the imagination. . . . Christianity has but a single possible
final heir to its estate, and that is scientific philosophy.”
In a still more radical vein, Professor Ribot (Psychologie des
Sentiments, p. 310) describes the evaporation of religion.  He
sums it up in a single formula–the ever-growing predominance of
the rational intellectual element, with the gradual fading out of
the emotional element, this latter tending to enter into the
group of purely intellectual sentiments.  “Of religious sentiment
properly so called, nothing survives at last save a vague respect
for the unknowable x which is a last relic of the fear, and a
certain attraction towards the ideal, which is a relic of the
love, that characterized the earlier periods of religious growth.
To state this more simply, religion tends to turn into religious
philosophy.–These are psychologically entirely different things,
the one being a theoretic construction of ratiocination, whereas
the other is the living work of a group of persons, or of a great
inspired leader, calling into play the entire thinking and
feeling organism of man.”
I find the same failure to recognize that the stronghold of
religion lies in individuality in attempts like those of
Professor Baldwin (Mental Development, Social and Ethical
Interpretations, ch. x) and Mr. H. R. Marshall (Instinct and
Reason, chaps.  viii. to xii.) to make it a purely “conservative
social force.”
Let us agree, then, that Religion, occupying herself with
personal destinies and keeping thus in contact with the only
absolute realities which we know, must necessarily play an
eternal part in human history.  The next thing to decide is what
she reveals about those destinies, or whether indeed she reveals
anything distinct enough to be considered a general message to
mankind.  We have done as you see, with our preliminaries, and
our final summing up can now begin.
I am well aware that after all the palpitating documents which I
have quoted, and all the perspectives of emotion-inspiring
institution and belief that my previous lectures have opened, the
dry analysis to which I now advance may appear to many of you
like an anti-climax, a tapering-off and flattening out of the
subject, instead of a crescendo of interest and result.  I said
awhile ago that the religious attitude of Protestants appears
poverty-stricken to the Catholic imagination.  Still more
poverty-stricken, I fear, may my final summing up of the subject
appear at first to some of you.  On which account I pray you now
to bear this point in mind, that in the present part of it I am
expressly trying to reduce religion to its lowest admissible
terms, to that minimum, free from individualistic excrescences,
which all religions contain as their nucleus, and on which it may
be hoped that all religious persons may agree.  That established,
we should have a result which might be small, but would at least
be solid; and on it and round it the ruddier additional beliefs
on which the different individuals make their venture might be
grafted, and flourish as richly as you please.  I shall add my
own over-belief (which will be, I confess, of a somewhat pallid
kind, as befits a critical philosopher), and you will, I hope,
also add your over-beliefs, and we shall soon be in the varied
world of concrete religious constructions once more.  For the
moment, let me dryly pursue the analytic part of the task.
Both thought and feeling are determinants of conduct, and the
same conduct may be determined either by feeling or by thought. 
When we survey the whole field of religion, we find a great
variety in the thoughts that have prevailed there; but the
feelings on the one hand and the conduct on the other are almost
always the same, for Stoic, Christian, and Buddhist saints are
practically indistinguishable in their lives.  The theories which
Religion generates, being thus variable, are secondary; and if
you wish to grasp her essence, you must look to the feelings and
the conduct as being the more constant elements.  It is between
these two elements that the short circuit exists on which she
carries on her principal business, while the ideas and symbols
and other institutions form loop-lines which may be perfections
and improvements, and may even some day all be united into one
harmonious system, but which are not to be regarded as organs
with an indispensable function, necessary at all times for
religious life to go on.  This seems to me the first conclusion
which we are entitled to draw from the phenomena we have passed
in review.
The next step is to characterize the feelings.  To what
psychological order do they belong?
The resultant outcome of them is in any case what Kant calls a
"sthenic” affection, an excitement of the cheerful, expansive,
"dynamogenic” order which, like any tonic, freshens our vital
powers.  In almost every lecture, but especially in the lectures
on Conversion and on Saintliness, we have seen how this emotion
overcomes temperamental melancholy and imparts endurance to the
Subject, or a zest, or a meaning, or an enchantment and glory to
the common objects of life.[340]  The name of “faith-state,” by
which Professor Leuba designates it, is a good one.[341]  It is a
biological as well as a psychological condition, and Tolstoy is
absolutely accurate in classing faith among the forces BY WHICH
MEN LIVE.[342]  The total absence of it, anhedonia,[343] means
collapse.
[340] Compare, for instance, pages 200, 215, 219, 222,
244-250, 270-273.
[341] American Journal of Psychology, vii. 345.
[342] Above, p. 181.
[343] Above, p. 143.
The faith-state may hold a very minimum of intellectual content. 
We saw examples of this in those sudden raptures of the divine
presence, or in such mystical seizures as Dr. Bucke
described.[344]  It may be a mere vague enthusiasm, half
spiritual, half vital, a courage, and a feeling that great and
wondrous things are in the air.[345]
[344] Above, p. 391.
[345] Example:  Henri Perreyve writes to Gratry:  “I do not know
how to deal with the happiness which you aroused in me this
morning. It overwhelms me; I want to DO something, yet I can do
nothing and am fit for nothing. . . . I would fain do GREAT
THINGS.”  Again, after an inspiring interview, he writes:  “I
went homewards, intoxicated with joy, hope, and strength.  I
wanted to feed upon my happiness in solitude far from all men. 
It was late; but, unheeding that, I took a mountain path and went
on like a madman, looking at the heavens, regardless of earth. 
Suddenly an instinct made me draw hastily back –I was on the
very edge of a precipice, one step more and I must have fallen. 
I took fright and gave up my nocturnal promenade.”  A. Gratry: 
Henri Perreyve, London, 1872, pp. 92, 89.
This primacy, in the faith-state, of vague expansive impulse over
direction is well expressed in Walt Whitman’s lines (Leaves of
Grass, 1872, p. 190):–  
“O to confront night, storms, hunger,ridicule, accidents,
     rebuffs, as the trees and animals do. . . .  
Dear Camerado! I confess I have urged you onward with me, and    
    still urge you, without the least idea what is our           
    destination  
Or whether we shall be victorious, or utterly quell’d and
defeated.”
This readiness for great things, and this sense that the world by
its importance, wonderfulness, etc., is apt for their production,
would seem to be the undifferentiated germ of all the higher
faiths.  Trust in our own dreams of ambition, or in our country’s
expansive destinies, and faith in the providence of God, all have
their source in that onrush of our sanguine impulses, and in that
sense of the exceedingness of the possible over the real.
When, however, a positive intellectual content is associated with
a faith-state, it gets invincibly stamped in upon belief,[346]
and this explains the passionate loyalty of religious persons
everywhere to the minutest details of their so widely differing
creeds.  Taking creeds and faith-state together, as forming
"religions,” and treating these as purely subjective phenomena,
without regard to the question of their “truth,” we are obliged,
on account of their extraordinary influence upon action and
endurance, to class them amongst the most important biological
functions of mankind.  Their stimulant and anaesthetic effect is
so great that Professor Leuba, in a recent article,[347] goes so
far as to say that so long as men can USE their God, they care
very little who he is, or even whether he is at all.  “The truth
of the matter can be put,” says Leuba, “in this way:  GOD IS NOT
KNOWN, HE IS NOT UNDERSTOOD; HE IS USED–sometimes as
meat-purveyor, sometimes as moral support, sometimes as friend,
sometimes as an object of love.  If he proves himself useful, the
religious consciousness asks for no more than that.  Does God
really exist?  How does he exist?  What is he?  are so many
irrelevant questions.  Not God, but life, more life, a larger,
richer, more satisfying life, is, in the last analysis, the end
of religion.  The love of life, at any and every level of
development, is the religious impulse."[348]
[346] Compare Leuba:  Loc. cit., pp. 346-349.
[347] The Contents of Religious Consciousness, in The Monist, xi.
536, July 1901.
[348] Loc. cit., pp. 571, 572, abridged.  See, also, this
writer’s extraordinarily true criticism of the notion that
religion primarily seeks to solve the intellectual mystery of the
world.  Compare what W. Bender says (in his Wesen der Religion,
Bonn, 1888, pp. 85, 38):  “Not the question about God, and not
the inquiry into the origin and purpose of the world is religion,
but the question about Man.  All religious views of life are
anthropocentric.”  “Religion is that activity of the human
impulse towards self-preservation by means of which Man seeks to
carry his essential vital purposes through against the adverse
pressure of the world by raising himself freely towards the
world’s ordering and governing powers when the limits of his own
strength are reached.”  The whole book is little more than a
development of these words.
At this purely subjective rating, therefore, Religion must be
considered vindicated in a certain way from the attacks of her
critics.  It would seem that she cannot be a mere anachronism and
survival, but must exert a permanent function, whether she be
with or without intellectual content, and whether, if she have
any, it be true or false.
We must next pass beyond the point of view of merely subjective
utility, and make inquiry into the intellectual content itself.
First, is there, under all the discrepancies of the creeds, a
common nucleus to which they bear their testimony unanimously?
And second, ought we to consider the testimony true?
I will take up the first question first, and answer it
immediately in the affirmative.  The warring gods and formulas of
the various religions do indeed cancel each other, but there is a
certain uniform deliverance in which religions all appear to
meet.  It consists of two parts:–
1.  An uneasiness; and
2.  Its solution.
1.  The uneasiness, reduced to its simplest terms, is a sense
that there is SOMETHING WRONG ABOUT US as we naturally stand.
2.  The solution is a sense that WE ARE SAVED FROM THE WRONGNESS
by making proper connection with the higher powers.
In those more developed minds which alone we are studying, the
wrongness takes a moral character, and the salvation takes a
mystical tinge.  I think we shall keep well within the limits of
what is common to all such minds if we formulate the essence of
their religious experience in terms like these:–
The individual, so far as he suffers from his wrongness and
criticises it, is to that extent consciously beyond it, and in at
least possible touch with something higher, if anything higher
exist.  Along with the wrong part there is thus a better part of
him, even though it may be but a most helpless germ.  With which
part he should identify his real being is by no means obvious at
this stage; but when stage 2 (the stage of solution or salvation)
arrives,[349] the man identifies his real being with the germinal
higher part of himself; and does so in the following way.  He
becomes conscious that this higher part is conterminous and
continuous with a MORE of the same quality, which is operative in
the universe outside of him, and which he can keep in working
touch with, and in a fashion get on board of and save himself
when all his lower being has gone to pieces in the wreck.
[349] Remember that for some men it arrives suddenly, for others
gradually, whilst others again practically enjoy it all their
life.
It seems to me that all the phenomena are accurately describable
in these very simple general terms.[350]  They allow for the
divided self and the struggle; they involve the change of
personal centre and the surrender of the lower self; they express
the appearance of exteriority of the helping power and yet
account for our sense of union with it;[351] and they fully
justify our feelings of security and joy.  There is probably no
autobiographic document, among all those which I have quoted, to
which the description will not well apply.  One need only add
such specific details as will adapt it to various theologies and
various personal temperaments, and one will then have the various
experiences reconstructed in their individual forms.
[350] The practical difficulties are:  1, to “realize the
reality” of one’s higher part; 2, to identify one’s self with it
exclusively; and 3, to identify it with all the rest of ideal
being.
[351] “When mystical activity is at its height, we find
consciousness possessed by the sense of a being at once EXCESSIVE
and IDENTICAL with the self:  great enough to be God; interior
enough to be ME.  The “objectivity” of it ought in that case to
be called EXCESSIVITY, rather, or exceedingness.” ReCeJac:  Essai
sur les fondements de la conscience mystique, 1897, p. 46.
So far, however, as this analysis goes, the experiences are only
psychological phenomena.  They possess, it is true, enormous
biological worth.  Spiritual strength really increases in the
subject when he has them, a new life opens for him, and they seem
to him a place of conflux where the forces of two universes meet;
and yet this may be nothing but his subjective way of feeling
things, a mood of his own fancy, in spite of the effects
produced.  I now turn to my second question:  What is the
objective “truth” of their content?[352]
[352] The word “truth” is here taken to mean something additional
to bare value for life, although the natural propensity of man is
to believe that whatever has great value for life is thereby
certified as true.
The part of the content concerning which the question of truth
most pertinently arises is that “MORE of the same quality” with
which our own higher self appears in the experience to come into
harmonious working relation.  Is such a “more” merely our own
notion, or does it really exist?  If so, in what shape does it
exist?  Does it act, as well as exist?   And in what form should
we conceive of that “union” with it of which religious geniuses
are so convinced?
It is in answering these questions that the various theologies
perform their theoretic work, and that their divergencies most
come to light.  They all agree that the “more” really exists;
though some of them hold it to exist in the shape of a personal
god or gods, while others are satisfied to conceive it as a
stream of ideal tendency embedded in the eternal structure of the
world.  They all agree, moreover, that it acts as well as exists,
and that something really is effected for the better when you
throw your life into its hands.  It is when they treat of the
experience of “union” with it that their speculative differences
appear most clearly.  Over this point pantheism and theism,
nature and second birth, works and grace and karma, immortality
and reincarnation, rationalism and mysticism, carry on inveterate
disputes.
At the end of my lecture on Philosophy[353] I held out the notion
that an impartial science of religions might sift out from the
midst of their discrepancies a common body of doctrine which she
might also formulate in terms to which <501> physical science
need not object.  This, I said, she might adopt as her own
reconciling hypothesis, and recommend it for general belief.  I
also said that in my last lecture I should have to try my own
hand at framing such an hypothesis.
[353] Above, p. 445.
The time has now come for this attempt.  Who says “hypothesis"
renounces the ambition to be coercive in his arguments. The most
I can do is, accordingly, to offer something that may fit the
facts so easily that your scientific logic will find no plausible
pretext for vetoing your impulse to welcome it as true.
The “more,” as we called it, and the meaning of our “union” with
it, form the nucleus of our inquiry.  Into what definite
description can these words be translated, and for what definite
facts do they stand?  It would never do for us to place ourselves
offhand at the position of a particular theology, the Christian
theology, for example, and proceed immediately to define the
"more” as Jehovah, and the “union” as his imputation to us of the
righteousness of Christ.  That would be unfair to other
religions, and, from our present standpoint at least, would be an
over-belief.
We must begin by using less particularized terms; and, since one
of the duties of the science of religions is to keep religion in
connection with the rest of science, we shall do well to seek
first of all a way of describing the “more,” which psychologists
may also recognize as real.  The subconscious self is nowadays a
well-accredited psychological entity; and I believe that in it we
have exactly the mediating term required.  Apart from all
religious considerations, there is actually and literally more
life in our total soul than we are at any time aware of.  The
exploration of the transmarginal field has hardly yet been
seriously undertaken, but what Mr. Myers said in 1892 in his
essay on the Subliminal Consciousness[354] is as true as when it
was first written:  “Each of us is in reality an abiding
psychical entity far more extensive than he knows–an
individuality which can never express itself completely through
any corporeal manifestation.  The Self manifests through the
organism; but there is always some part of the Self unmanifested;
and always, as it seems, some power of organic expression in
abeyance or reserve."[355]  Much of the content of this larger
background against which our conscious being stands out in relief
is insignificant.  Imperfect memories, silly jingles, inhibitive
timidities, “dissolutive” phenomena of various sorts, as Myers
calls them, enters into it for a large part.  But in it many of
the performances of genius seem also to have their origin; and in
our study of conversion, of mystical experiences, and of prayer,
we have seen how striking a part invasions from this region play
in the religious life.
[354] Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, vol.
vii. p. 305. For a full statement of Mr. Myers’s views, I may
refer to his posthumous work, “Human Personality in the Light of
Recent Research,” which is already announced by Messrs. 
Longmans, Green & Co. as being in press.  Mr. Myers for the
first time proposed as a general psychological problem the
exploration of the subliminal region of consciousness throughout
its whole extent, and made the first methodical steps in its
topography by treating as a natural series a mass of subliminal
facts hitherto considered only as curious isolated facts and
subjecting them to a systematized nomenclature.  How important
this exploration will prove, future work upon the path which
Myers has opened can alone show.  compare my paper:  “Frederic
Myers’s services to Psychology,” in the said Proceedings, part
xlii., May, 1901.
[355] Compare the inventory given above on pp. 472-4, and also
what is said of the subconscious self on pp. 228-231, 235-236.
Let me then propose, as an hypothesis, that whatever it may be on
its FARTHER side, the “more” with which in religious experience
we feel ourselves connected is on its HITHER side the
subconscious continuation of our conscious life. Starting thus
with a recognized psychological fact as our basis, we seem to
preserve a contact with “science” which the ordinary theologian
lacks.  At the same time the theologian’s contention that the
religious man is moved by an external power is vindicated, for it
is one of the peculiarities of invasions from the subconscious
region to take on objective appearances, and to suggest to the
Subject an external control.  In the religious life the control
is felt as “higher"; but since on our hypothesis it is primarily
the higher faculties of our own hidden mind which are
controlling, the sense of union with the power beyond us is a
sense of something, not merely apparently, but literally true.
This doorway into the subject seems to me the best one for a
science of religions, for it mediates between a number of
different points of view.  Yet it is only a doorway, and
difficulties present themselves as soon as we step through it,
and ask how far our transmarginal consciousness carries us if we
follow it on its remoter side.  Here the over-beliefs begin: 
here mysticism and the conversion-rapture and Vedantism and
transcendental idealism bring in their monistic
interpretations[356] and tell us that the finite self rejoins the
absolute self, for it was always one with God and identical with
the soul of the world.[357]  Here the prophets of all the
different religions come with their visions, voices, raptures,
and other openings, supposed by each to authenticate his own
peculiar faith.
[356] Compare above, pp. 410 ff.
[357] One more expression of this belief, to increase the
reader’s familiarity with the notion of it:–
“If this room is full of darkness for thousands of years, and you
come in and begin to weep and wail, ’Oh, the darkness,’ will the
darkness vanish?  Bring the light in, strike a match, and light
comes in a moment.  So what good will it do you to think all your
lives, ’Oh, I have done evil, I have made many mistakes’?  It
requires no ghost to tell us that.  Bring in the light, and the
evil goes in a moment.  Strengthen the real nature, build up
yourselves, the effulgent, the resplendent, the ever pure, call
that up in every one whom you see.  I wish that every one of us
had come to such a state that even when we see the vilest of
human beings we can see the God within, and instead of
condemning, say, ’Rise, thou effulgent One, rise thou who art
always pure, rise thou birthless and deathless, rise almighty,
and manifest your nature.’ . . . This is the highest prayer that
the Advaita teaches.  This is the one prayer:  remembering our
nature.”. . . “Why does man go out to look for a God? . . . It is
your own heart beating, and you did not know, you were mistaking
it for something external.  He, nearest of the near, my own self,
the reality of my own life, my body and my soul.–I am Thee and
Thou art Me.  That is your own nature.  Assert it, manifest it. 
Not to become pure, you are pure already.  You are not to be
perfect, you are that already.  Every good thought which you
think or act upon is simply tearing the veil, as it were, and the
purity, the Infinity, the God behind, manifests itself–the
eternal Subject of everything, the eternal Witness in this
universe, your own Self.  Knowledge is, as it were, a lower step,
a degradation.  We are It already; how to know It?”  Swami
Viverananda: Addresses, No. XII., Practical Vedanta, part iv. pp.
172, 174, London, 1897; and Lectures, The Real and the Apparent
Man, p. 24, abridged.
Those of us who are not personally favored with such specific
revelations must stand outside of them altogether and, for the
present at least, decide that, since they corroborate
incompatible theological doctrines, they neutralize one another
and leave no fixed results.  If we follow any one of them, or if
we follow philosophical theory and embrace monistic pantheism on
non-mystical grounds, we do so in the exercise of our individual
freedom, and build out our religion in the way most congruous
with our personal susceptibilities.  Among these susceptibilities
intellectual ones play a decisive part.  Although the religious
question is primarily a question of life, of living or not living
in the higher union which opens itself to us as a gift, yet the
spiritual excitement in which the gift appears a real one will
often fail to be aroused in an individual until certain
particular intellectual beliefs or ideas which, as we say, come
home to him, are touched.[358] These ideas will thus be essential
to that individual’s religion;–which is as much as to say that
over-beliefs in various directions are absolutely indispensable,
and that we should treat them with tenderness and tolerance so
long as they are not intolerant themselves. As I have elsewhere
written, the most interesting and valuable things about a man are
usually his over-beliefs.
[358] For instance, here is a case where a person exposed from
her birth to Christian ideas had to wait till they came to her
clad in spiritistic formulas before the saving experience set
in:–
“For myself I can say that spiritualism has saved me.  It was
revealed to me at a critical moment of my life, and without it I
don’t know what I should have done.  It has taught me to detach
myself from worldly things and to place my hope in things to
come.  Through it I have learned to see in all men, even in those
most criminal, even in those from whom I have most suffered,
undeveloped brothers to whom I owed assistance, love, and
forgiveness.  I have learned that I must lose my temper over
nothing despise no one, and pray for all.  Most of all I have
learned to pray!  And although I have still much to learn in this
domain, prayer ever brings me more strength, consolation, and
comfort.  I feel more than ever that I have only made a few steps
on the long road of progress; but I look at its length without
dismay, for I have confidence that the day will come when all my
efforts shall be rewarded.  So Spiritualism has a great place in
my life, indeed it holds the first place there.”  Flournoy
Collection.
Disregarding the over beliefs, and confining ourselves to what is
common and generic, we have in the fact that the conscious person
is continuous with a wider self through which saving experiences
come,[359] a positive content of religious experience which, it
seems to me, is literally and objectively true as far as it goes.
If I now proceed to state my own hypothesis about the farther
limits of this extension of our personality, I shall be offering
my own over-belief– though I know it will appear a sorry
under-belief to some of you–for which I can only bespeak the
same indulgence which in a converse case I should accord to
yours.
[359] “The influence of the Holy Spirit, exquisitely called the
Comforter, is a matter of actual experience, as solid a reality
as that of electro magnetism.”  W. C. Brownell, Scribner’s
Magazine, vol. xxx. p. 112.
<506> The further limits of our being plunge, it seems to me,
into an altogether other dimension of existence from the sensible
and merely “understandable” world.  Name it the mystical region,
or the supernatural region, whichever you choose.  So far as our
ideal impulses originate in this region (and most of them do
originate in it, for we find them possessing us in a way for
which we cannot articulately account), we belong to it in a more
intimate sense than that in which we belong to the visible world,
for we belong in the most intimate sense wherever our ideals
belong.  Yet the unseen region in question is not merely ideal,
for it produces effects in this world.  When we commune with it,
work is actually done upon our finite personality, for we are
turned into new men, and consequences in the way of conduct
follow in the natural world upon our regenerative change.[360]
But that which produces effects within another reality must be
termed a reality itself, so I feel as if we had no philosophic
excuse for calling the unseen or mystical world unreal.
[360] That the transaction of opening ourselves, otherwise called
prayer, is a perfectly definite one for certain persons, appears
abundantly in the preceding lectures.  I append another concrete
example to rein force the impression on the reader’s mind:–
“Man can learn to transcend these limitations [of finite thought]
and draw power and wisdom at will. . . . The divine presence is
known through experience.  The turning to a higher plane is a
distinct act of consciousness.  It is not a vague, twilight or
semi-conscious experience.  It is not an ecstasy, it is not a
trance.  It is not super-consciousness in the Vedantic sense.  It
is not due to self-hypnotization.  It is a perfectly calm, sane,
sound, rational, common-sense shifting of consciousness from the
phenomena of sense-perception to the phenomena of seership, from
the thought of self to a distinctively higher realm. . . . For
example, if the lower self be nervous, anxious, tense, one can in
a few moments compel it to be calm.  This is not done by a word
simply.  Again I say, it is not hypnotism.  It is by the exercise
of power.  One feels the spirit of peace as definitely as heat is
perceived on a hot summer day.  The power can be as surely used
as the sun s rays can be focused and made to do work, to set fire
to wood.”  The Higher Law, vol. iv. pp. 4, 6, Boston, August,
1901.
God is the natural appellation, for us Christians at least, for
the supreme reality, so I will call this higher part of the
universe by the name of God.[361]  We and God have business with
each other; and in opening ourselves to his influence our deepest
destiny is fulfilled.  The universe, at those parts of it which
our personal being constitutes, takes a turn genuinely for the
worse or for the better in proportion as each one of us fulfills
or evades God’s demands.  As far as this goes I probably have you
with me, for I only translate into schematic language what I may
call the instinctive belief of mankind:  God is real since he
produces real effects.
[361] Transcendentalists are fond of the term “Over-soul,” but as
a rule they use it in an intellectualist sense, as meaning only a
medium of communion.  “God” is a causal agent as well as a medium
of communion, and that is the aspect which I wish to emphasize.
The real effects in question, so far as I have as yet admitted
them, are exerted on the personal centres of energy of the
various subjects, but the spontaneous faith of most of the
subjects is that they embrace a wider sphere than this.  Most
religious men believe (or “know,” if they be mystical) that not
only they themselves, but the whole universe of beings to whom
the God is present, are secure in his parental hands.  There is a
sense, a dimension, they are sure, in which we are ALL saved, in
spite of the gates of hell and all adverse terrestrial
appearances.  God’s existence is the guarantee of an ideal order
that shall be permanently preserved.  This world may indeed, as
science assures us, some day burn up or freeze; but if it is part
of his order, the old ideals are sure to be brought elsewhere to
fruition, so that where God is, tragedy is only provisional and
partial, and shipwreck and dissolution are not the absolutely
final things.  Only when this farther step of faith concerning
God is taken, and remote objective consequences are predicted,
does religion, as it seems to me, get wholly free from the first
immediate subjective experience, and bring a REAL HYPOTHESIS into
play.  A good hypothesis in science must have other properties
than those of the phenomenon it is immediately invoked to
explain, otherwise it is not prolific enough.  God, meaning only
what enters into the religious man’s experience of union, falls
short of being an hypothesis of this more useful order.  He needs
to enter into wider cosmic relations in order to justify the
subject’s absolute confidence and peace.
That the God with whom, starting from the hither side of our own
extra-marginal self, we come at its remoter margin into commerce
should be the absolute world-ruler, is of course a very
considerable over-belief.  Over-belief as it is, though, it is an
article of almost every one’s religion.  Most of us pretend in
some way to prop it upon our philosophy, but the philosophy
itself is really propped upon this faith. What is this but to say
that Religion, in her fullest exercise of function, is not a mere
illumination of facts already elsewhere given, not a mere
passion, like love, which views things in a rosier light.  It is
indeed that, as we have seen abundantly.  But it is something
more, namely, a postulator of new FACTS as well.  The world
interpreted religiously is not the materialistic world over
again, with an altered expression; it must have, over and above
the altered expression, a natural constitution different at some
point from that which a materialistic world would have.  It must
be such that different events can be expected in it, different
conduct must be required.
This thoroughly “pragmatic” view of religion has usually been
taken as a matter of course by common men.  They have
interpolated divine miracles into the field of nature, they have
built a heaven out beyond the grave.  It is only
transcendentalist metaphysicians who think that, without adding
any concrete details to Nature, or subtracting any, but by
simply calling it the expression of absolute spirit, you make it
more divine just as it stands.  I believe the pragmatic way of
taking religion to be the deeper way.  It gives it body as well
as soul, it makes it claim, as everything real must claim, some
characteristic realm of fact as its very own. What the more
characteristically divine facts are, apart from the actual inflow
of energy in the faith-state and the prayer-state, I know not. 
But the over-belief on which I am ready to make my personal
venture is that they exist.  The whole drift of my education goes
to persuade me that the world of our present consciousness is
only one out of many worlds of consciousness that exist, and that
those other worlds must contain experiences which have a meaning
for our life also; and that although in the main their
experiences and those of this world keep discrete, yet the two
become continuous at certain points, and higher energies filter
in.  By being faithful in my poor measure to this over-belief, I
seem to myself to keep more sane and true.  I CAN, of course, put
myself into the sectarian scientist’s attitude, and imagine
vividly that the world of sensations and of scientific laws and
objects may be all.  But whenever I do this, I hear that inward
monitor of which W. K. Clifford once wrote, whispering the word
"bosh!”  Humbug is humbug, even though it bear the scientific
name, and the total expression of human experience, as I view it
objectively, invincibly urges me beyond the narrow “scientific"
bounds.  Assuredly, the real world is of a different
temperament–more intricately built than physical science allows.
So my objective and my subjective conscience both hold me to the
over-belief which I express.  Who knows whether the faithfulness
of individuals here below to their own poor over-beliefs may not
actually help God in turn to be more effectively faithful to his
own greater tasks?
In writing my concluding lecture I had to aim so much at
simplification that I fear that my general philosophic position
received so scant a statement as hardly to be intelligible to
some of my readers.  I therefore add this epilogue, which must
also be so brief as possibly to remedy but little the defect.  In
a later work I may be enabled to state my position more amply and
consequently more clearly.
Originality cannot be expected in a field like this, where all
the attitudes and tempers that are possible have been exhibited
in literature long ago, and where any new writer can immediately
be classed under a familiar head.  If one should make a division
of all thinkers into naturalists and supernaturalists, I should
undoubtedly have to go, along with most philosophers, into the
supernaturalist branch.  But there is a crasser and a more
refined supernaturalism, and it is to the refined division that
most philosophers at the present day belong.  If not regular
transcendental idealists, they at least obey the Kantian
direction enough to bar out ideal entities from interfering
causally in the course of phenomenal events.  Refined
supernaturalism is universalistic supernaturalism; for the
"crasser” variety “piecemeal” supernaturalism would perhaps be
the better name.  It went with that older theology which to-day
is supposed to reign only among uneducated people, or to be found
among the few belated professors of the dualisms which Kant is
thought to have displaced.  It admits miracles and providential
leadings, and finds no intellectual difficulty in mixing the
ideal and the real worlds together by interpolating influences
from the ideal region among the forces that causally determine
the real world’s details.  In this the refined supernaturalists
think that it muddles disparate dimensions of existence.  For
them the world of the ideal has no efficient causality, and never
bursts into the world of phenomena at particular points.  The
ideal world, for them, is not a world of facts, but only of the
meaning of facts; it is a point of view for judging facts.  It
appertains to a different “-ology,” and inhabits a different
dimension of being altogether from that in which existential
propositions obtain.  It cannot get down upon the flat level of
experience and interpolate itself piecemeal between distinct
portions of nature, as those who believe, for example, in divine
aid coming in response to prayer, are bound to think it must.
Notwithstanding my own inability to accept either popular
Christianity or scholastic theism, I suppose that my belief that
in communion with the Ideal new force comes into the world, and
new departures are made here below, subjects me to being classed
among the supernaturalists of the piecemeal or crasser type. 
Universalistic supernaturalism surrenders, it seems to me, too
easily to naturalism.  It takes the facts of physical science at
their face-value, and leaves the laws of life just as naturalism
finds them, with no hope of remedy, in case their fruits are bad.
It confines itself to sentiments about life as a whole,
sentiments which may be admiring and adoring, but which need not
be so, as the existence of systematic pessimism proves.  In this
universalistic way of taking the ideal world, the essence of
practical religion seems to me to evaporate.  Both instinctively
and for logical reasons, I find it hard to believe that
principles can exist which make no difference in facts.[362]  But
all facts are particular facts, and the whole interest of the
question of God’s existence seems to me to lie in the
consequences for particulars which that existence may be expected
to entail. That no concrete particular of experience should alter
its complexion in consequence of a God being there seems to me an
incredible proposition, and yet it is the thesis to which
(implicitly at any rate) refined supernaturalism seems to cling. 
It is only with experience en bloc, it says, that the Absolute
maintains relations.  It condescends to no transactions of
detail.
[362] Transcendental idealism, of course, insists that its ideal
world makes THIS difference, that facts EXIST.  We owe it to the
Absolute that we have a world of fact at all.  “A world” of
fact!–that exactly is the trouble.  An entire world is the
smallest unit with which the Absolute can work, whereas to our
finite minds work for the better ought to be done within this
world, setting in at single points.  Our difficulties and our
ideals are all piecemeal affairs, but the Absolute can do no
piecework for us; so that all the interests which our poor souls
compass raise their heads too late.  We should have spoken
earlier, prayed for another world absolutely, before this world
was born.  It is strange, I have heard a friend say, to see this
blind corner into which Christian thought has worked itself at
last, with its God who can raise no particular weight whatever,
who can help us with no private burden, and who is on the side of
our enemies as much as he is on our own.  Odd evolution from the
God of David’s psalms!
I am ignorant of Buddhism and speak under correction, and merely
in order the better to describe my general point of view; but as
I apprehend the Buddhistic doctrine of Karma, I agree in
principle with that.  All supernaturalists admit that facts are
under the judgment of higher law; but for Buddhism as I interpret
it, and for religion generally so far as it remains unweakened by
transcendentalistic metaphysics, the word “judgment” here means
no such bare academic verdict or platonic appreciation as it
means in Vedantic or modern absolutist systems; it carries, on
the contrary, EXECUTION with it, is in rebus as well as post rem.
and operates “causally” as partial factor in the total fact. The
universe becomes a gnosticism[363] pure and simple on any other
terms.  But this view that judgment and execution go together is
that of the crasser supernaturalist way of thinking, so the
present volume must on the whole be classed with the other
expressions of that creed.
[363] See my Will to Believe and other Essays in popular
Philosophy. 1897, p. 165.
I state the matter thus bluntly, because the current of thought
in academic circles runs against me, and I feel like a man who
must set his back against an open door quickly if he does not
wish to see it closed and locked.  In spite of its being so
shocking to the reigning intellectual tastes, I believe that a
candid consideration of piecemeal supernaturalism and a complete
discussion of all its metaphysical bearings will show it to be
the hypothesis by which the largest number of legitimate
requirements are met.  That of course would be a program for
other books than this; what I now say sufficiently indicates to
the philosophic reader the place where I belong.
If asked just where the differences in fact which are due to
God’s existence come in, I should have to say that in general I
have no hypothesis to offer beyond what the phenomenon of
"prayerful communion,” especially when certain kinds of incursion
from the subconscious region take part in it, immediately
suggests.  The appearance is that in this phenomenon something
ideal, which in one sense is part of ourselves and in another
sense is not ourselves, actually exerts an influence, raises our
centre of personal energy, and produces regenerative effects
unattainable in other ways.  If, then, there be a wider world of
being than that of our every-day consciousness, if in it there be
forces whose effects on us are intermittent, if one facilitating
condition of the effects be the openness of the “subliminal"
door, we have the elements of a theory to which the phenomena of
religious life lend plausibility.  I am so impressed by the
importance of these phenomena that I adopt the hypothesis which
they so naturally suggest.  At these places at least, I say, it
would seem as though transmundane energies, God, if you will,
produced immediate effects within the natural world to which the
rest of our experience belongs.
The difference in natural “fact” which most of us would assign as
the first difference which the existence of a God ought to make
would, I imagine, be personal immortality. Religion, in fact, for
the great majority of our own race MEANS immortality, and nothing
else.  God is the producer of immortality; and whoever has doubts
of immortality is written down as an atheist without farther
trial.  I have said nothing in my lectures about immortality or
the belief therein, for to me it seems a secondary point.  If our
ideals are only cared for in “eternity,” I do not see why we
might not be willing to resign their care to other hands than
ours.  Yet I sympathize with the urgent impulse to be present
ourselves, and in the conflict of impulses, both of them so vague
yet both of them noble, I know not how to decide.  It seems to me
that it is eminently a case for facts to testify.  Facts, I
think, are yet lacking to prove “spirit-return,” though I have
the highest respect for the patient labors of Messrs. Myers,
Hodgson, and Hyslop, and am somewhat impressed by their favorable
conclusions.  I consequently leave the matter open, with this
brief word to save the reader from a possible perplexity as to
why immortality got no mention in the body of this book.
The ideal power with which we feel ourselves in connection, the
"God” of ordinary men, is, both by ordinary men and by
philosophers, endowed with certain of those metaphysical
attributes which in the lecture on philosophy I treated with such
disrespect.  He is assumed as a matter of course to be “one and
only” and to be “infinite"; and the notion of many finite gods is
one which hardly any one thinks it worth while to consider, and
still less to uphold.  Nevertheless, in the interests of
intellectual clearness, I feel bound to say that religious
experience, as we have studied it, cannot be cited as
unequivocally supporting the infinitist belief.  The only thing
that it unequivocally testifies to is that we can experience
union with SOMETHING larger than ourselves and in that union find
our greatest peace.  Philosophy, with its passion for unity, and
mysticism with its monoideistic bent, both “pass to the limit"
and identify the something with a unique God who is the
all-inclusive soul of the world.  Popular opinion, respectful to
their authority, follows the example which they set.
Meanwhile the practical needs and experiences of religion seem to
me sufficiently met by the belief that beyond each man and in a
fashion continuous with him there exists a larger power which is
friendly to him and to his ideals.  All that the facts require is
that the power should be both other and larger than our conscious
selves.  Anything larger will do, if only it be large enough to
trust for the next step. It need not be infinite, it need not be
solitary.  It might conceivably even be only a larger and more
godlike self, of which the present self would then be but the
mutilated expression, and the universe might conceivably be a
collection of such selves, of different degrees of inclusiveness,
with no absolute unity realized in it at all.[364] Thus would a
sort of polytheism return upon us–a polytheism which I do not on
this occasion defend, for my only aim at present is to keep the
testimony of religious experience clearly within its proper
bounds.  [Compare p. 130 above.]
[364] Such a notion is suggested in my Ingersoll Lecture On Human
Immortality, Boston and London, 1899.
Upholders of the monistic view will say to such a polytheism
(which, by the way, has always been the real religion of common
people, and is so still to-day) that unless there be one
all-inclusive God, our guarantee of security is left imperfect. 
In the Absolute, and in the Absolute only, ALL is saved.  If
there be different gods, each caring for his part, some portion
of some of us might not be covered with divine protection, and
our religious consolation would thus fail to be complete.  It
goes back to what was said on pages 129-131, about the
possibility of there being portions of the universe that may
irretrievably be lost.  Common sense is less sweeping in its
demands than philosophy or mysticism have been wont to be, and
can suffer the notion of this world being partly saved and partly
lost.  The ordinary moralistic state of mind makes the salvation
of the world conditional upon the success with which each unit
does its part.  Partial and conditional salvation is in fact a
most familiar notion when taken in the abstract, the only
difficulty being to determine the details.  Some men are even
disinterested enough to be willing to be in the unsaved remnant
as far as their persons go, if only they can be persuaded that
their cause will prevail–all of us are willing, whenever our
activity-excitement rises sufficiently high.  I think, in fact,
that a final philosophy of religion will have to consider the
pluralistic hypothesis more seriously than it has hitherto been
willing to consider it.  For practical life at any rate, the
CHANCE of salvation is enough.  No fact in human nature is more
characteristic than its willingness to live on a chance.  The
existence of the chance makes the difference, as Edmund Gurney
says, between a life of which the keynote is resignation and a
life of which the keynote is hope.[365]  But all these statements
are unsatisfactory from their brevity, and I can only say that I
hope to return to the same questions in another book.
[365] Tertium Quid, 1887, p. 99.  See also pp. 148, 149.
The road by which William James arrived at his position of
leadership among American philosophers was, during his childhood,
youth and early maturity, quite as circuitous and unpredictable
as were his father’s ideas on the training of his children. That
Swedenborgian theologian foresaw neither the career of novelist
for his son Henry, nor that of pragmatist philosopher for the
older William.  The father’s migrations between New York, Europe
and Newport meant that William’s education had variety if it did
not have fixed direction.  From 13 to 18 he studied in Europe and
returned to Newport, Rhode Island, to study painting under the
guidance of John La Farge.  After a year, he gave up art for
science and entered Harvard University, where his most
influential teachers were Louis Agassiz and Charles W. Eliot. 
In 1863, William James began the study of medicine, and in 1865
he joined an expedition to the Amazon. Before long, he wrote: 
"If there is anything I hate, it is collecting.” His studies
constantly interrupted by ill health, James returned to Germany
and began hearing lectures and reading voluminously in
philosophy.  He won his medical degree at Harvard in 1870.  For
four years he was an invalid in Cambridge, but finally, in 1873,
he passed his gravest physical and spiritual crises and began the
career by which he was to influence so profoundly generations of
American students.  From 1880 to 1907 he was successively
assistant professor of philosophy, professor of psychology and
professor of philosophy at Harvard.  In 1890, the publication of
his Principles of Psycholog brought him the acknowledged
leadership in the field of functional psychology.  The selection
of William James to deliver the Gifford lectures in Edinburgh was
at once a tribute to him and a reward for the university that
sponsored the undertaking.  These lectures, collected in this
volume, have since become famous as the standard scientific work
on the psychology of the religious impulse.  Death ended his
career on August 27th, 1910.

This electronic book of The Varieties of Religious Experience (A Study in Human Nature) by William James is in the public domain.
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on December 2003.

