




We have now passed in review the more important of the phenomena
which are regarded as fruits of genuine religion and
characteristics of men who are devout.  Today we have to change
our attitude from that of description to that of appreciation; we
have to ask whether the fruits in question can help us to judge
the absolute value of what religion adds to human life.  Were I
to parody Kant, I should say that a “Critique of pure
Saintliness” must be our theme.
If, in turning to this theme, we could descend upon our subject
from above like Catholic theologians, with our fixed definitions
of man and man’s perfection and our positive dogmas about God, we
should have an easy time of it.  Man’s perfection would be the
fulfillment of his end; and his end would be union with his
Maker.  That union could be pursued by him along three paths,
active, purgative, and contemplative, respectively; and progress
along either path would be a simple matter to measure by the
application of a limited number of theological and moral
conceptions and definitions.  The absolute significance and value
of any bit of religious experience we might hear of would thus be
given almost mathematically into our hands.
If convenience were everything, we ought now to grieve at finding
ourselves cut off from so admirably convenient a method as this. 
But we did cut ourselves off from it deliberately in those
remarks which you remember we made, in our first lecture, about
the empirical method; and it must be <321> confessed that after
that act of renunciation we can never hope for clean-cut and
scholastic results.  WE cannot divide man sharply into an animal
and a rational part.  WE cannot distinguish natural from
supernatural effects; nor among the latter know which are favors
of God, and which are counterfeit operations of the demon.  WE
have merely to collect things together without any special a
priori theological system, and out of an aggregate of piecemeal
judgments as to the value of this and that experience–judgments
in which our general philosophic prejudices, our instincts, and
our common sense are our only guides–decide that ON THE WHOLE
one type of religion is approved by its fruits, and another type
condemned.  “On the whole"–I fear we shall never escape
complicity with that qualification, so dear to your practical
man, so repugnant to your systematizer!
I also fear that as I make this frank confession, I may seem to
some of you to throw our compass overboard, and to adopt caprice
as our pilot.  Skepticism or wayward choice, you may think, can
be the only results of such a formless method as I have taken up.
A few remarks in deprecation of such an opinion, and in farther
explanation of the empiricist principles which I profess, may
therefore appear at this point to be in place.
Abstractly, it would seem illogical to try to measure the worth
of a religion’s fruits in merely human terms of value. How CAN
you measure their worth without considering whether the God
really exists who is supposed to inspire them?  If he really
exists, then all the conduct instituted by men to meet his wants
must necessarily be a reasonable fruit of his religion–it would
be unreasonable only in case he did not exist.  If, for instance,
you were to condemn a religion of human or animal sacrifices by
virtue of your subjective sentiments, and if all the while a
deity were really there demanding such sacrifices, you would be
making a theoretical mistake by tacitly assuming that the deity
must be non-existent; you would be setting up a theology of your
own as much as if you were a scholastic philosopher.
To this extent, to the extent of disbelieving peremptorily in
certain types of deity, I frankly confess that we must be
theologians.  If disbeliefs can be said to constitute a theology,
then the prejudices, instincts, and common sense which I chose as
our guides make theological partisans of us whenever they make
certain beliefs abhorrent.
But such common-sense prejudices and instincts are themselves the
fruit of an empirical evolution.  Nothing is more striking than
the secular alteration that goes on in the moral and religious
tone of men, as their insight into nature and their social
arrangements progressively develop.  After an interval of a few
generations the mental climate proves unfavorable to notions of
the deity which at an earlier date were perfectly satisfactory: 
the older gods have fallen below the common secular level, and
can no longer be believed in.  Today a deity who should require
bleeding sacrifices to placate him would be too sanguinary to be
taken seriously.  Even if powerful historical credentials were
put forward in his favor, we would not look at them.  Once, on
the contrary, his cruel appetites were of themselves credentials.
They positively recommended him to men’s imaginations in ages
when such coarse signs of power were respected and no others
could be understood.  Such deities then were worshiped because
such fruits were relished.
Doubtless historic accidents always played some later part, but
the original factor in fixing the figure of the gods must always
have been psychological.  The deity to whom the prophets, seers,
and devotees who founded the particular cult bore witness was
worth something to them personally. They could use him.  He
guided their imagination, warranted their hopes, and controlled
their will–or else they required him as a safeguard against the
demon and a curber of other people’s crimes.  In any case, they
chose him for the value of the fruits he seemed to them to yield.
So soon as the fruits began to seem quite worthless; so soon as
they conflicted with indispensable human ideals, or thwarted too
extensively other values; so soon as they appeared childish,
contemptible, or immoral when reflected on, the deity grew
discredited, and was erelong neglected and forgotten.  It was in
this way that the Greek and Roman gods ceased to be believed in
by educated pagans; it is thus that we ourselves judge of the
Hindu, Buddhist, and Mohammedan theologies; Protestants have so
dealt with the Catholic notions of deity, and liberal Protestants
with older Protestant notions; it is thus that Chinamen judge of
us, and that all of us now living will be judged by our
descendants.  When we cease to admire or approve what the
definition of a deity implies, we end by deeming that deity
incredible.
Few historic changes are more curious than these mutations of
theological opinion.  The monarchical type of sovereignty was,
for example, so ineradicably planted in the mind of our own
forefathers that a dose of cruelty and arbitrariness in their
deity seems positively to have been required by their
imagination.  They called the cruelty “retributive justice,” and
a God without it would certainly have struck them as not
“sovereign” enough.  But today we abhor the very notion of
eternal suffering inflicted; and that arbitrary dealing-out of
salvation and damnation to selected individuals, of which
Jonathan Edwards could persuade himself that he had not only a
conviction, but a “delightful conviction,” as of a doctrine
“exceeding pleasant, bright, and sweet,” appears to us, if
sovereignly anything, sovereignly irrational and mean.  Not only
the cruelty, but the paltriness of character of the gods believed
in by earlier centuries also strikes later centuries with
surprise.  We shall see examples of it from the annals of
Catholic saintship which makes us rub our Protestant eyes. 
Ritual worship in general appears to the modern
transcendentalist, as well as to the ultra-puritanic type of
mind, as if addressed to a deity of an almost absurdly childish
character, taking delight in toy-shop furniture, tapers and
tinsel, costume and mumbling and mummery, and finding his “glory"
incomprehensibly enhanced thereby:–just as on the other hand the
formless spaciousness of pantheism appears quite empty to
ritualistic natures, and the gaunt theism of evangelical sects
seems intolerably bald and chalky and bleak.
Luther, says Emerson, would have cut off his right hand rather
than nail his theses to the door at Wittenberg, if he had
supposed that they were destined to lead to the pale negations of
Boston Unitarianism.
So far, then, although we are compelled, whatever may be our
pretensions to empiricism, to employ some sort of a standard of
theological probability of our own whenever we assume to estimate
the fruits of other men’s religion, yet this very standard has
been begotten out of the drift of common life.  It is the voice
of human experience within us, judging and condemning all gods
that stand athwart the pathway along which it feels itself to be
advancing.  Experience, if we take it in the largest sense, is
thus the parent of those disbeliefs which, it was charged, were
inconsistent with the experiential method.  The inconsistency,
you see, is immaterial, and the charge may be neglected.
If we pass from disbeliefs to positive beliefs, it seems to me
that there is not even a formal inconsistency to be laid against
our method.  The gods we stand by are the gods we need and can
use, the gods whose demands on us are reinforcements of our
demands on ourselves and on one another. What I then propose to
do is, briefly stated, to test saintliness by common sense, to
use human standards to help us decide how far the religious life
commends itself as an ideal kind of human activity.  If it
commends itself, then any theological beliefs that may inspire
it, in so far forth will stand accredited.  If not, then they
will be discredited, and all without reference to anything but
human working principles.  It is but the elimination of the
humanly unfit, and the survival of the humanly fittest, applied
to religious beliefs; and if we look at history candidly and
without prejudice, we have to admit that no religion has ever in
the long run established or proved itself in any other way. 
Religions have APPROVED themselves; they have ministered to
sundry vital needs which they found reigning.  When they violated
other needs too strongly, or when other faiths came which served
the same needs better, the first religions were supplanted.
The needs were always many, and the tests were never sharp.  So
the reproach of vagueness and subjectivity and “on the
whole"-ness, which can with perfect legitimacy be addressed to
the empirical method as we are forced to use it, is after all a
reproach to which the entire life of man in dealing with these
matters is obnoxious.  No religion has ever yet owed its
prevalence to “apodictic certainty.”    In a later lecture I will
ask whether objective certainty can ever be added by theological
reasoning to a religion that already empirically prevails.
One word, also, about the reproach that in following this sort of
an empirical method we are handing ourselves over to systematic
skepticism.
Since it is impossible to deny secular alterations in our
sentiments and needs, it would be absurd to affirm that one’s own
age of the world can be beyond correction by the next age. 
Skepticism cannot, therefore, be ruled out by any set of thinkers
as a possibility against which their conclusions are secure; and
no empiricist ought to claim exemption from this universal
liability.  But to admit one’s liability to correction is one
thing, and to embark upon a sea of wanton doubt is another.  Of
willfully playing into the hands of skepticism we cannot be
accused.  He who acknowledges the imperfectness of his
instrument, and makes allowance <326> for it in discussing his
observations, is in a much better position for gaining truth than
if he claimed his instrument to be infallible.  Or is dogmatic or
scholastic theology less doubted in point of fact for claiming,
as it does, to be in point of right undoubtable?  And if not,
what command over truth would this kind of theology really lose
if, instead of absolute certainty, she only claimed reasonable
probability for her conclusions?  If WE claim only reasonable
probability, it will be as much as men who love the truth can
ever at any given moment hope to have within their grasp. Pretty
surely it will be more than we could have had, if we were
unconscious of our liability to err.
Nevertheless, dogmatism will doubtless continue to condemn us for
this confession.  The mere outward form of inalterable certainty
is so precious to some minds that to renounce it explicitly is
for them out of the question.  They will claim it even where the
facts most patently pronounce its folly.  But the safe thing is
surely to recognize that all the insights of creatures of a day
like ourselves must be provisional. The wisest of critics is an
altering being, subject to the better insight of the morrow, and
right at any moment, only “up to date” and “on the whole.”   
When larger ranges of truth open, it is surely best to be able to
open ourselves to their reception, unfettered by our previous
pretensions. “Heartily know, when half-gods go, the gods arrive.”
The fact of diverse judgments about religious phenomena is
therefore entirely unescapable, whatever may be one’s own desire
to attain the irreversible.  But apart from that fact, a more
fundamental question awaits us, the question whether men’s
opinions ought to be expected to be absolutely uniform in this
field.  Ought all men to have the same religion? Ought they to
approve the same fruits and follow the same leadings?  Are they
so like in their inner needs that, for hard and soft, for proud
and humble, for strenuous and lazy, for healthy-minded and
despairing, exactly the same religious incentives are required? 
Or are different functions in the organism of humanity allotted
to different types of man, so that some may really be the better
for a religion of consolation and reassurance, whilst others are
better for one of terror and reproof?  It might conceivably be
so; and we shall, I think, more and more suspect it to be so as
we go on. And if it be so, how can any possible judge or critic
help being biased in favor of the religion by which his own needs
are best met?  He aspires to impartiality; but he is too close to
the struggle not to be to some degree a participant, and he is
sure to approve most warmly those fruits of piety in others which
taste most good and prove most nourishing to HIM.
I am well aware of how anarchic much of what I say may sound. 
Expressing myself thus abstractly and briefly, I may seem to
despair of the very notion of truth.  But I beseech you to
reserve your judgment until we see it applied to the details
which lie before us.  I do indeed disbelieve that we or any other
mortal men can attain on a given day to absolutely incorrigible
and unimprovable truth about such matters of fact as those with
which religions deal.  But I reject this dogmatic ideal not out
of a perverse delight in intellectual instability.  I am no lover
of disorder and doubt as such.  Rather do I fear to lose truth by
this pretension to possess it already wholly.  That we can gain
more and more of it by moving always in the right direction, I
believe as much as any one, and I hope to bring you all to my way
of thinking before the termination of these lectures.  Till then,
do not, I pray you, harden your minds irrevocably against the
empiricism which I profess.
I will waste no more words, then, in abstract justification of my
method, but seek immediately to use it upon the facts.
In critically judging of the value of religious phenomena, it is
very important to insist on the distinction between religion as
an individual personal function, and religion as an
institutional, corporate, or tribal product.  I drew this
distinction, you may remember, in my second lecture.  The word
“religion,” as ordinarily used, is equivocal.  A survey of
history shows us that, as a rule, religious geniuses attract
disciples, and produce groups of sympathizers.  When these groups
get strong enough to “organize” themselves, they become
ecclesiastical institutions with corporate ambitions of their
own.  The spirit of politics and the lust of dogmatic rule are
then apt to enter and to contaminate the originally innocent
thing; so that when we hear the word “religion” nowadays, we
think inevitably of some “church” or other; and to some persons
the word “church” suggests so much hypocrisy and tyranny and
meanness and tenacity of superstition that in a wholesale
undiscerning way they glory in saying that they are “down” on
religion altogether.  Even we who belong to churches do not
exempt other churches than our own from the general condemnation.
But in this course of lectures ecclesiastical institutions hardly
concern us at all.  The religious experience which we are
studying is that which lives itself out within the private
breast.  First-hand individual experience of this kind has always
appeared as a heretical sort of innovation to those who witnessed
its birth.  Naked comes it into the world and lonely; and it has
always, for a time at least, driven him who had it into the
wilderness, often into the literal wilderness out of doors, where
the Buddha, Jesus, Mohammed, St. Francis, George Fox, and so many
others had to go.  George Fox expresses well this isolation; and
I can do no better at this point than read to you a page from his
Journal, referring to the period of his youth when religion began
to ferment within him seriously.
“I fasted much,” Fox says, “walked abroad in solitary places many
days, and often took my Bible, and sat in hollow trees and
lonesome places until night came on; and frequently in the night
walked mournfully about by myself; for I was a man of sorrows in
the time of the first workings of the Lord in me.
“During all this time I was never joined in profession of
religion with any, but gave up myself to the Lord, having
forsaken all evil company, taking leave of father and mother, and
all other relations, and traveled up and down as a stranger on
the earth, which way the Lord inclined my heart; taking a chamber
to myself in the town where I came, and tarrying sometimes more,
sometimes less in a place:  for I durst not stay long in a place,
being afraid both of professor and profane, lest, being a tender
young man, I should be hurt by conversing much with either.  For
which reason I kept much as a stranger, seeking heavenly wisdom
and getting knowledge from the Lord; and was brought off from
outward things, to rely on the Lord alone.  As I had forsaken the
priests, so I left the separate preachers also, and those called
the most experienced people; for I saw there was none among them
all that could speak to my condition.  And when all my hopes in
them and in all men were gone so that I had nothing outwardly to
help me, nor could tell what to do; then, oh then, I heard a
voice which said, ’There is one, even Jesus Christ, that can
speak to thy condition.’  When I heard it, my heart did leap for
joy.  Then the Lord let me see why there was none upon the earth
that could speak to my condition. I had not fellowship with any
people, priests, nor professors, nor any sort of separated
people.  I was afraid of all carnal talk and talkers, for I could
see nothing but corruptions.  When I was in the deep, under all
shut up, I could not believe that I should ever overcome; my
troubles, my sorrows, and my temptations were so great that I
often thought I should have despaired, I was so tempted.  But
when Christ opened to me how he was tempted by the same devil,
and had overcome him, and had bruised his head; and that through
him and his power, life, grace, and spirit, I should overcome
also, I had confidence in him.  If I had had a king’s diet,
palace, and attendance, all would have been as nothing, for
nothing gave me comfort but the Lord by his power.  I saw
professors, priests, and people were whole and at ease in that
condition which was my misery, and they loved that which I would
have been rid of.  But the Lord did stay my desires upon himself,
and my care was cast upon him alone."[198]
[198] George Fox:  Journal, Philadelphia, 1800, pp. 59-61,
abridged.
A genuine first-hand religious experience like this is bound to
be a heterodoxy to its witnesses, the prophet appearing as a mere
lonely madman.  If his doctrine prove contagious enough to spread
to any others, it becomes a definite and labeled heresy.  But if
it then still prove contagious enough to triumph over
persecution, it becomes itself an orthodoxy; and when a religion
has become an orthodoxy, its day of inwardness is over:  the
spring is dry; the faithful live at second hand exclusively and
stone the prophets in their turn.  The new church, in spite of
whatever human goodness it may foster, can be henceforth counted
on as a staunch ally in every attempt to stifle the spontaneous
religious spirit, and to stop all later bubblings of the fountain
from which in purer days it drew its own supply of inspiration.
Unless, indeed, by adopting new movements of the spirit it can
make capital out of them and use them for its selfish corporate
designs! Of protective action of this politic sort, promptly or
tardily decided on, the dealings of the Roman ecclesiasticism
with many individual saints and prophets yield examples enough
for our instruction.
The plain fact is that men’s minds are built, as has been often
said, in water-tight compartments.  Religious after a fashion,
they yet have many other things in them beside their religion,
and unholy entanglements and associations inevitably obtain.  The
basenesses so commonly charged to religion’s account are thus,
almost all of them, not chargeable at all to religion proper, but
rather to religion’s wicked practical partner, the spirit of
corporate dominion.  And the bigotries are most of them in their
turn chargeable to religion’s wicked intellectual partner, the
spirit of dogmatic dominion, the passion for laying down the law
in the form of an absolutely closed-in theoretic system.  The
ecclesiastical spirit in general is the sum of these two spirits
of dominion; and I beseech you never to confound the phenomena of
mere tribal or corporate psychology which it presents with those
manifestations of the purely interior life which are the
exclusive object of our study.  The baiting of Jews, the hunting
of Albigenses and Waldenses, the stoning of Quakers and ducking
of Methodists, the murdering of Mormons and the massacring of
Armenians, express much rather that aboriginal human neophobia,
that pugnacity of which we all share the vestiges, and that
inborn hatred of the alien and of eccentric and non-conforming
men as aliens, than they express the positive piety of the
various perpetrators.  Piety is the mask, the inner force is
tribal instinct.  You believe as little as I do, in spite of the
Christian unction with which the German emperor addressed his
troops upon their way to China, that the conduct which he
suggested, and in which other Christian armies went beyond them,
had anything whatever to do with the interior religious life of
those concerned in the performance.
Well, no more for past atrocities than for this atrocity should
we make piety responsible.  At most we may blame piety for not
availing to check our natural passions, and sometimes for
supplying them with hypocritical pretexts. But hypocrisy also
imposes obligations, and with the pretext usually couples some
restriction; and when the passion gust is over, the piety may
bring a reaction of repentance which the irreligious natural man
would not have shown.
For many of the historic aberrations which have been laid to her
charge, religion as such, then, is not to blame.  Yet of the
charge that over-zealousness or fanaticism is one of her
liabilities we cannot wholly acquit her, so I will next make a
remark upon that point.  But I will preface it by a preliminary
remark which connects itself with much that follows.
 
Our survey of the phenomena of saintliness has unquestionably
produced in your minds an impression of extravagance. Is it
necessary, some of you have asked, as one example after another
came before us, to be quite so fantastically good as that?  We
who have no vocation for the extremer ranges of sanctity will
surely be let off at the last day if our humility, asceticism,
and devoutness prove of a less convulsive sort.  This practically
amounts to saying that much that it is legitimate to admire in
this field need nevertheless not be imitated, and that religious
phenomena, like all other human phenomena, are subject to the law
of the golden mean.  Political reformers accomplish their
successive tasks in the history of nations by being blind for the
time to other causes.  Great schools of art work out the effects
which it is their mission to reveal, at the cost of a
one-sidedness for which other schools must make amends.  We
accept a John Howard, a Mazzini, a Botticelli, a Michael Angelo,
with a kind of indulgence.  We are glad they existed to show us
that way, but we are glad there are also other ways of seeing and
taking life.  So of many of the saints whom we have looked at. 
We are proud of a human nature that could be so passionately
extreme, but we shrink from advising others to follow the
example.  The conduct we blame ourselves for not following lies
nearer to the middle line of human effort. It is less dependent
on particular beliefs and doctrines.  It is such as wears well in
different ages, such as under different skies all judges are able
to commend.
The fruits of religion, in other words, are, like all human
products, liable to corruption by excess.  Common sense must
judge them.  It need not blame the votary; but it may be able to
praise him only conditionally, as one who acts faithfully
according to his lights.  He shows us heroism in one way, but the
unconditionally good way is that for which no indulgence need be
asked.
 
We find that error by excess is exemplified by every saintly
virtue.  Excess, in human faculties, means usually one-sidedness
or want of balance; for it is hard to imagine an essential
faculty too strong, if only other faculties equally strong be
there to cooperate with it in action.  Strong affections need a
strong will; strong active powers need a strong intellect; strong
intellect needs strong sympathies, to keep life steady.  If the
balance exist, no one faculty can possibly be too strong–we only
get the stronger all-round character.  In the life of saints,
technically so called, the spiritual faculties are strong, but
what gives the impression of extravagance proves usually on
examination to be a relative deficiency of intellect.  Spiritual
excitement takes pathological forms whenever other interests are
too few and the intellect too narrow.  We find this exemplified
by all the saintly attributes in turn–devout love of God,
purity, charity, asceticism, all may lead astray.  I will run
over these virtues in succession.
First of all let us take Devoutness.  When unbalanced, one of its
vices is called Fanaticism.  Fanaticism (when not a mere
expression of ecclesiastical ambition) is only loyalty carried to
a convulsive extreme.  When an intensely loyal and narrow mind is
once grasped by the feeling that a certain superhuman person is
worthy of its exclusive devotion, one of the first things that
happens is that it idealizes the devotion itself.  To adequately
realize the merits of the idol gets to be considered the one
great merit of the worshiper; and the sacrifices and servilities
by which savage tribesmen have from time immemorial exhibited
their faithfulness to chieftains are now outbid in favor of the
deity.  Vocabularies are exhausted and languages altered in the
attempt to praise him enough; death is looked on as gain if it
attract his grateful notice; and the personal attitude of being
his devotee becomes what one might almost call a new and exalted
kind of professional specialty within the tribe.[199] The legends
that gather round the lives of holy persons are fruits of this
impulse to celebrate and glorify.  The Buddha[200] and
Mohammed[201] and their companions and many Christian saints are
incrusted with a heavy jewelry of anecdotes which are meant to be
honorific, but are simply abgeschmackt and silly, and form a
touching expression of man’s misguided propensity to praise.
[199] Christian saints have had their specialties of devotion,
Saint Francis to Christ’s wounds; Saint Anthony of Padua to
Christ’s childhood; Saint Bernard to his humanity; Saint Teresa
to Saint Joseph, etc.  The Shi-ite Mohammedans venerate Ali, the
Prophet’s son-in-law, instead of Abu-bekr, his brother-in-law. 
Vambery describes a dervish whom he met in Persia, “who had
solemnly vowed, thirty years before, that he would never employ
his organs of speech otherwise but in uttering, everlastingly,
the name of his favorite, Ali, Ali.  He thus wished to signify to
the world that he was the most devoted partisan of that Ali who
had been dead a thousand years.  In his own home, speaking with
his wife, children, and friends, no other word but ’Ali!’ ever
passed his lips.  If he wanted food or drink or anything else, he
expressed his wants still by repeating ’Ali!’  Begging or buying
at the bazaar, it was always ’Ali!’  Treated ill or generously,
he would still harp on his monotonous ’Ali!’  Latterly his zeal
assumed such tremendous proportions that, like a madman, he would
race, the whole day, up and down the streets of the town,
throwing his stick high up into the air, and shriek our, all the
while, at the top of his voice, ’Ali!’  This dervish was
venerated by everybody as a saint, and received everywhere with
the greatest distinction.”  Arminius Vambery, his Life and
Adventures, written by Himself, London, 1889, p. 69.  On the
anniversary of the death of Hussein, Ali’s son, the Shi-ite
Moslems still make the air resound with cries of his name and
Ali’s.
[200] Compare H. C. Warren:  Buddhism in Translation, Cambridge,
U.S., 1898, passim.
[201] Compare J. L. Merrick:  The Life and Religion of Mohammed,
as contained in the Sheeah traditions of the Hyat-ul-Kuloob,
Boston. 1850, passim.
An immediate consequence of this condition of mind is jealousy
for the deity’s honor.  How can the devotee show his loyalty
better than by sensitiveness in this regard?  The slightest
affront or neglect must be resented, the deity’s enemies must be
put to shame.  In exceedingly narrow minds and active wills, such
a care may become an engrossing preoccupation; and crusades have
been preached and massacres instigated for no other reason than
to remove a fancied slight upon the God.  Theologies representing
the gods as mindful of their glory, and churches with
imperialistic policies, have conspired to fan this temper to a
glow, so that intolerance and persecution have come to be vices
associated by some of us inseparably with the saintly mind. They
are unquestionably its besetting sins.  The saintly temper is a
moral temper, and a moral temper has often to be cruel.  It is a
partisan temper, and that is cruel.  Between his own and
Jehovah’s enemies a David knows no difference; a Catherine of
Siena, panting to stop the warfare among Christians which was the
scandal of her epoch, can think of no better method of union
among them than a crusade to massacre the Turks; Luther finds no
word of protest or regret over the atrocious tortures with which
the Anabaptist leaders were put to death; and a Cromwell praises
the Lord for delivering his enemies into his hands for
“execution.”  Politics come in in all such cases; but piety finds
the partnership not quite unnatural.  So, when “freethinkers"
tell us that religion and fanaticism are twins, we cannot make an
unqualified denial of the charge.
Fanaticism must then be inscribed on the wrong side of religion’s
account, so long as the religious person’s intellect is on the
stage which the despotic kind of God satisfies.  But as soon as
the God is represented as less intent on his own honor and glory,
it ceases to be a danger.
Fanaticism is found only where the character is masterful and
aggressive.  In gentle characters, where devoutness is intense
and the intellect feeble, we have an imaginative absorption in
the love of God to the exclusion of all practical human
interests, which, though innocent enough, is too one-sided to be
admirable.  A mind too narrow has room but for one kind of
affection.  When the love of God takes possession of such a mind,
it expels all human loves and human uses.  There is no English
name for such a sweet excess of devotion, so I will refer to it
as a theopathic condition.
The blessed Margaret Mary Alacoque may serve as an example.
“To be loved here upon the earth,” her recent biographer
exclaims:  “to be loved by a noble, elevated, distinguished
being; to be loved with fidelity, with devotion–what
enchantment! But to be loved by God! and loved by him to
distraction [aime jusqu’a la folie]!–Margaret melted away with
love at the thought of such a thing.  Like Saint Philip of Neri
in former times, or like Saint Francis Xavier, she said to God: 
’Hold back, O my God, these torrents which overwhelm me, or else
enlarge my capacity for their reception."[202]
[202] Bougaud:  Hist. de la bienheureuse Marguerite Marie, Paris,
1894, p. 145.
The most signal proofs of God’s love which Margaret Mary received
were her hallucinations of sight, touch, and hearing, and the
most signal in turn of these were the revelations of Christ’s
sacred heart, “surrounded with rays more brilliant than the Sun,
and transparent like a crystal.  The wound which he received on
the cross visibly appeared upon it.  There was a crown of thorns
round about this divine Heart, and a cross above it.”  At the
same time Christ’s voice told her that, unable longer to contain
the flames of his love for mankind, he had chosen her by a
miracle to spread the knowledge of them.  He thereupon took out
her mortal heart, placed it inside of his own and inflamed it,
and then replaced it in her breast, adding:  “Hitherto thou hast
taken the name of my slave, hereafter thou shalt be called the
well-beloved disciple of my Sacred Heart.”
In a later vision the Saviour revealed to her in detail the
“great design” which he wished to establish through her
instrumentality.  “I ask of thee to bring it about that every
first Friday after the week of holy Sacrament shall be made into
a special holy day for honoring my Heart by a general communion
and by services intended to make honorable amends for the
indignities which it has received.  And I promise thee that my
Heart will dilate to shed with abundance the influences of its
love upon all those who pay to it these honors, or who bring it
about that others do the same.”
“This revelation,” says Mgr. Bougaud, “is unquestionably the most
important of all the revelations which have illumined the Church
since that of the Incarnation and of the Lord’s Supper. . . . 
After the Eucharist, the supreme effort of the Sacred
Heart."[203]  Well, what were its good fruits for Margaret Mary’s
life?  Apparently little else but sufferings and prayers and
absences of mind and swoons and ecstasies.  She became
increasingly useless about the convent, her absorption in
Christ’s love–
“which grew upon her daily, rendering her more and more incapable
of attending to external duties.  They tried her in the
infirmary, but without much success, although her kindness, zeal,
and devotion were without bounds, and her charity rose to acts of
such a heroism that our readers would not bear the recital of
them.  They tried her in the kitchen, but were forced to give it
up as hopeless–everything dropped out of her hands.  The
admirable humility with which she made amends for her clumsiness
could not prevent this from being prejudicial to the order and
regularity which must always reign in a community. They put her
in the school, where the little girls cherished her, and cut
pieces out of her clothes [for relics] as if she were already a
saint, but where she was too absorbed inwardly to pay the
necessary attention.  Poor dear sister, even less after her
visions than before them was she a denizen of earth, and they had
to leave her in her heaven."[204]
[203] Bougaud:  Hist. de la bienheureuse Marguerite Marie,
Paris, 1894, pp. 365, 241.
[204] Bougaud:  Op. cit., p. 267.
Poor dear sister, indeed! Amiable and good, but so feeble of
intellectual outlook that it would be too much to ask of us, with
our Protestant and modern education, to feel anything but
indulgent pity for the kind of saintship which she embodies.  A
lower example still of theopathic saintliness is that of Saint
Gertrude, a Benedictine nun of the thirteenth century, whose
“Revelations,” a well-known mystical authority, consist mainly of
proofs of Christ’s partiality for her undeserving person. 
Assurances of his love, intimacies and caresses and compliments
of the most absurd and puerile sort, addressed by Christ to
Gertrude as an individual, form the tissue of this paltry-minded
recital.[205] In reading such a narrative, we realize the gap
between the thirteenth and the twentieth century, and we feel
that saintliness of character may yield almost absolutely
worthless fruits if it be associated with such inferior
intellectual sympathies.  What with science, idealism, and
democracy, our own imagination has grown to need a God of an
entirely different temperament from that Being interested
exclusively in dealing out personal favors, with whom our
ancestors were so contented.  Smitten as we are with the vision
of social righteousness, a God indifferent to everything but
adulation, and full of partiality for his individual favorites,
lacks an essential element of largeness; and even the best
professional sainthood of former centuries, pent in as it is to
such a conception, seems to us curiously shallow and unedifying.
[205] Examples:  “Suffering from a headache, she sought, for the
glory of God, to relieve herself by holding certain odoriferous
substances in her mouth, when the Lord appeared to her to lean
over towards her lovingly, and to find comfort Himself in these
odors.  After having gently breathed them in, He arose, and said
with a gratified air to the Saints, as if contented with what He
had done: ’see the new present which my betrothed has given Me!’
“One day, at chapel, she heard supernaturally sung the words
’Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus.’ The son of God leaning towards her
like a sweet lover, and giving to her soul the softest kiss, said
to her at the second Sanctus:  ’In this Sanctus addressed to my
person, receive with this kiss all the sanctity of my divinity
and of my humanity, and let it be to thee a sufficient
preparation for approaching the communion table.’ And the next
following Sunday, while she was thanking God for this favor,
behold the Son of God, more beauteous than thousands of angels,
takes her in His arms as if He were proud of her and presents her
to God the Father, in that perfection of sanctity with which He
had dowered her.  And the Father took such delight in this soul
thus presented by His only son, that, as if unable longer to
restrain Himself, He gave her, and the Holy Ghost gave her also,
the sanctity attributed to each by His own Sanctus–and thus she
remained endowed with the plenary fullness of the blessing of
Sanctity, bestowed on her by Omnipotence, by Wisdom, and by
Love.”  Revelations de Sainte Gertrude, Paris, 1898, i. 44, 186.
Take Saint Teresa, for example, one of the ablest women, in many
respects, of whose life we have the record.  She had a powerful
intellect of the practical order.  She wrote admirable
descriptive psychology, possessed a will equal to any emergency,
great talent for politics and business, a buoyant disposition,
and a first-rate literary style.  She was tenaciously aspiring,
and put her whole life at the service of her religious ideals. 
Yet so paltry were these, according to our present way of
thinking, that (although I know that others have been moved
differently) I confess that my only feeling in reading her has
been pity that so much vitality of soul should have found such
poor employment.
In spite of the sufferings which she endured, there is a curious
flavor of superficiality about her genius.  A Birmingham
anthropologist, Dr. Jordan, has divided the human race into two
types, whom he calls “shrews” and “nonshrews” respectively.[206]
The shrew-type is defined as possessing an “active unimpassioned
temperament.”  In other words, shrews are the “motors,” rather
than the “sensories,"[207] and their expressions are as a rule
more energetic than the feelings which appear to prompt them. 
Saint Teresa, paradoxical as such a judgment may sound, was a
typical shrew, in this sense of the term.  The bustle of her
style, as well as of her life, proves it.  Not only must she
receive unheard-of personal favors and spiritual graces from her
Saviour, but she must immediately write about them and exploiter
them professionally, and use her expertness to give instruction
to those less privileged.  Her voluble egotism; her sense, not of
radical bad being, as the really contrite have it, but of her
“faults” and “imperfections” in the plural; her stereotyped
humility and return upon herself, as covered with “confusion” at
each new manifestation of God’s singular partiality for a person
so unworthy, are typical of shrewdom:  a paramountly feeling
nature would be objectively lost in gratitude, and silent.  She
had some public instincts, it is true; she hated the Lutherans,
and longed for the church’s triumph over them; but in the main
her idea of religion seems to have been that of an endless
amatory flirtation–if one may say so without irreverence–
between the devotee and the deity; and apart from helping younger
nuns to go in this direction by the inspiration of her example
and instruction, there is absolutely no human use in her, or sign
of any general human interest.  Yet the spirit of her age, far
from rebuking her, exalted her as superhuman.
[206]  Furneaux Jordan:  Character in Birth and Parentage, first
edition. Later editions change the nomenclature.
[207] As to this distinction, see the admirably practical account
in J. M. Baldwin’s little book, The Story of the Mind, 1898.
We have to pass a similar judgment on the whole notion of
saintship based on merits.  Any God who, on the one hand, can
care to keep a pedantically minute account of individual
shortcomings, and on the other can feel such partialities, and
load particular creatures with such insipid marks of favor, is
too small-minded a God for our credence.  When Luther, in his
immense manly way, swept off by a stroke of his hand the very
notion of a debit and credit account kept with individuals by the
Almighty, he stretched the soul’s imagination and saved theology
from puerility.
 
So much for mere devotion, divorced from the intellectual
conceptions which might guide it towards bearing useful human
fruit.
The next saintly virtue in which we find excess is Purity.  In
theopathic characters, like those whom we have just considered,
the love of God must not be mixed with any other love.  Father
and mother, sisters, brothers, and friends are felt as
interfering distractions; for sensitiveness and narrowness, when
they occur together, as they often do, require above all things a
simplified world to dwell in.  Variety and confusion are too much
for their powers of comfortable adaptation.  But whereas your
aggressive pietist reaches his unity objectively, by forcibly
stamping disorder and divergence out, your retiring pietist
reaches his subjectively, leaving disorder in the world at large,
but making a smaller world in which he dwells himself and from
which he eliminates it altogether.  Thus, alongside of the church
militant with its prisons, dragonnades, and inquisition methods,
we have the church fugient, as one might call it, with its
hermitages, monasteries, and sectarian organizations, both
churches pursuing the same object–to unify the life,[208] and
simplify the spectacle presented to the soul.  A mind extremely
sensitive to inner discords will drop one external relation after
another, as interfering with the absorption of consciousness in
spiritual things.  Amusements must go first, then conventional
“society,” then business, then family duties, until at last
seclusion, with a subdivision of the day into hours for stated
religious acts, is the only thing that can be borne.  The lives
of saints are a history of successive renunciations of
complication, one form of contact with the outer life being
dropped after another, to save the purity of inner tone.[209] 
“Is it not better,” a young sister asks her Superior, “that I
should not speak at all during the hour of recreation, so as not
to run the risk, by speaking, of falling into some sin of which I
might not be conscious?"[210]  If the life remains a social one
at all, those who take part in it must follow one identical rule.
Embosomed in this monotony, the zealot for purity feels clean and
free once more.  The minuteness of uniformity maintained in
certain sectarian communities, whether monastic or not, is
something almost inconceivable to a man of the world.  Costume,
phraseology, hours, and habits are absolutely stereotyped, and
there is no doubt that some persons are so made as to find in
this stability an incomparable kind of mental rest.
[208] On this subject I refer to the work of M. Murisier (Les
Maladies du sentiment Religieux, Paris, 1901), who makes inner
unification the mainspring of the whole religious life.  But ALL
strongly ideal interests, religious or irreligious, unify the
mind and tend to subordinate everything to themselves.  One would
infer from M. Murisier’s pages that this formal condition was
peculiarly characteristic of religion, and that one might in
comparison almost neglect material content, in studying the
latter.  I trust that the present work will convince the reader
that religion has plenty of material content which is
characteristic and which is more important by far than any
general psychological form.  In spite of this criticism, I find
M. Murisier’s book highly instructive.
[209] Example:  “At the first beginning of the Servitor’s
[Suso’s] interior life, after he had purified his soul properly
by confession, he marked out for himself, in thought, three
circles, within which he shut himself up, as in a spiritual
intrenchment.  The first circle was his cell, his chapel, and the
choir.  When he was within this circle, he seemed to himself in
complete security.  The second circle was the whole monastery as
far as the outer gate.  The third and outermost circle was the
gate itself, and here it was necessary for him to stand well upon
his guard.  When he went outside these circles, it seemed to him
that he was in the plight of some wild animal which is outside
its hole, and surrounded by the hunt, and therefore in need of
all its cunning and watchfulness.”  The Life of the Blessed Henry
Suso, by Himself, translated by Knox, London, 1865, p. 168.
[210] Vie des premieres Religieuses Dominicaines de la
Congregation de St. Dominique, a Nancy; Nancy, 1896, p. 129.
We have no time to multiply examples, so I will let the case of
Saint Louis of Gonzaga serve as a type of excess in purification.
I think you will agree that this youth carried the elimination of
the external and discordant to a point which we cannot
unreservedly admire.  At the age of ten, his biographer says:–
“The inspiration came to him to consecrate to the Mother of God
his own virginity–that being to her the most agreeable of
possible presents.  Without delay, then, and with all the fervor
there was in him, joyous of heart, and burning with love, he made
his vow of perpetual chastity.  Mary accepted the offering of his
innocent heart, and obtained for him from God, as a recompense,
the extraordinary grace of never feeling during his entire life
the slightest touch of temptation against the virtue of purity. 
This was an altogether exceptional favor, rarely accorded even to
Saints themselves, and all the more marvelous in that Louis dwelt
always in courts and among great folks, where danger and
opportunity are so unusually frequent.  It is true that Louis
from his earliest childhood had shown a natural repugnance for
whatever might be impure or unvirginal, and even for relations of
any sort whatever between persons of opposite sex.  But this made
it all the more surprising that he should, especially since this
vow, feel it necessary to have recourse to such a number of
expedients for protecting against even the shadow of danger the
virginity which he had thus consecrated.  One might suppose that
if any one could have contented himself with the ordinary
precautions, prescribed for all Christians, it would assuredly
have been he.  But no! In the use of preservatives and means of
defense, in flight from the most insignificant occasions, from
every possibility of peril, just as in the mortification of his
flesh, he went farther than the majority of saints.  He, who by
an extraordinary protection of God’s grace was never tempted,
measured all his steps as if he were threatened on every side by
particular dangers.  Thenceforward he never raised his eyes,
either when walking in the streets, or when in society.  Not only
did he avoid all business with females even more scrupulously
than before, but he renounced all conversation and every kind of
social recreation with them, although his father tried to make
him take part; and he commenced only too early to deliver his
innocent body to austerities of every kind."[211]
[211] Meschler’s Life of Saint Louis of Gonzaga, French
translation by Lebrequier, 1891, p. 40.
At the age of twelve, we read of this young man that “if by
chance his mother sent one of her maids of honor to him with a
message, he never allowed her to come in, but listened to her
through the barely opened door, and dismissed her immediately. 
He did not like to be alone with his own mother, whether at table
or in conversation; and when the rest of the company withdrew, he
sought also a pretext for retiring. . . .  Several great ladies,
relatives of his, he avoided learning to know even by sight; and
he made a sort of treaty with his father, engaging promptly and
readily to accede to all his wishes, if he might only be excused
from all visits to ladies.” [212]
[212] Ibid., p. 71.
When he was seventeen years old Louis joined the Jesuit
order,[213] against his father’s passionate entreaties, for he
was heir of a princely house; and when a year later the father
died, he took the loss as a “particular attention” to himself on
God’s part, and wrote letters of stilted good advice, as from a
spiritual superior, to his grieving mother.  He soon became so
good a monk that if any one asked him the number of his brothers
and sisters, he had to reflect and count them over before
replying.  A Father asked him one day if he were never troubled
by the thought of his family, to which, “I never think of them
except when praying for them,” was his only answer.  Never was he
seen to hold in his hand a flower or anything perfumed, that he
might take pleasure in it.  On the contrary, in the hospital, he
used to seek for whatever was most disgusting, and eagerly snatch
the bandages of ulcers, etc., from the hands of his companions. 
He avoided worldly talk, and immediately tried to turn every
conversation on to pious subjects, or else he remained silent. 
He systematically refused to notice his surroundings.  Being
ordered one day to bring a book from the rector’s seat in the
refectory, he had to ask where the rector sat, for in the three
months he had eaten bread there, so carefully did he guard his
eyes that he had not noticed the place.  One day, during recess,
having looked by chance on one of his companions, he reproached
himself as for a grave sin against modesty.  He cultivated
silence, as preserving from sins of the tongue; and his greatest
penance was the limit which his superiors set to his bodily
penances.  He sought after false accusations and unjust
reprimands as opportunities of humility; and such was his
obedience that, when a room-mate, having no more paper, asked him
for a sheet, he did not feel free to give it to him without first
obtaining the permission of the superior, who, as such, stood in
the place of God, and transmitted his orders.
[213] In his boyish note-book he praises the monastic life for
its freedom from sin, and for the imperishable treasures, which
it enables us to store up, “of merit in God’s eyes which makes of
Him our debtor for all Eternity.”  Loc. cit., p. 62.
I can find no other sorts of fruit than these of Louis’s
saintship.  He died in 1591, in his twenty-ninth year, and is
known in the Church as the patron of all young people.  On his
festival, the altar in the chapel devoted to him in a certain
church in Rome “is embosomed in flowers, arranged with exquisite
taste; and a pile of letters may be seen at its foot, written to
the Saint by young men and women, and directed to ’Paradiso.’
They are supposed to be burnt unread except by San Luigi, who
must find singular petitions in these pretty little missives,
tied up now with a green ribbon, expressive of hope, now with a
red one, emblematic of love,” etc.[214]
[214] Mademoiselle Mori, a novel quoted in Hare’s Walks in Rome,
1900, i. 55.
I cannot resist the temptation to quote from Starbuck’s book, p.
388, another case of purification by elimination.  It runs as
follows:–
“The signs of abnormality which sanctified persons show are of
frequent occurrence.  They get out of tune with other people;
often they will have nothing to do with churches, which they
regard as worldly; they become hypercritical towards others; they
grow careless of their social, political, and financial
obligations.  As an instance of this type may be mentioned a
woman of sixty-eight of whom the writer made a special study. 
She had been a member of one of the most active and progressive
churches in a busy part of a large city.  Her pastor described
her as having reached the censorious stage.  She had grown more
and more out of sympathy with the church; her connection with it
finally consisted simply in attendance at prayer-meeting, at
which her only message was that of reproof and condemnation of
the others for living on a low plane.  At last she withdrew from
fellowship with any church.  The writer found her living alone in
a little room on the top story of a cheap boarding-house quite
out of touch with all human relations, but apparently happy in
the enjoyment of her own spiritual blessings.  Her time was
occupied in writing booklets on sanctification–page after page
of dreamy rhapsody.  She proved to be one of a small group of
persons who claim that entire salvation involves three steps
instead of two; not only must there be conversion and
sanctification, but a third, which they call ’crucifixion’ or
’perfect redemption,’ and which seems to bear the same relation
to sanctification that this bears to conversion.  She related how
the Spirit had said to her, ’Stop going to church.  Stop going to
holiness meetings.  Go to your own room and I will teach you.’
She professes to care nothing for colleges, or preachers, or
churches, but only cares to listen to what God says to her.  Her
description of her experience seemed entirely consistent; she is
happy and contented, and her life is entirely satisfactory to
herself.  While listening to her own story, one was tempted to
forget that it was from the life of a person who could not live
by it in conjunction with her fellows.”
Our final judgment of the worth of such a life as this will
depend largely on our conception of God, and of the sort of
conduct he is best pleased with in his creatures.  The
Catholicism of the sixteenth century paid little heed to social
righteousness; and to leave the world to the devil whilst saving
one’s own soul was then accounted no discreditable scheme. 
To-day, rightly or wrongly, helpfulness in general human affairs
is, in consequence of one of those secular mutations in moral
sentiment of which I spoke, deemed an essential element of worth
in character; and to be of some public or private use is also
reckoned as a species of divine service.  Other early Jesuits,
especially the missionaries among them, the Xaviers, Brebeufs,
Jogues, were objective minds, and fought in their way for the
world’s welfare; so their lives to-day inspire us.  But when the
intellect, as in this Louis, is originally no larger than a pin’s
head, and cherishes ideas of God of corresponding smallness, the
result, notwithstanding the heroism put forth, is on the whole
repulsive.  Purity, we see in the object-lesson, is NOT the one
thing needful; and it is better that a life should contract many
a dirt-mark, than forfeit usefulness in its efforts to remain
unspotted.
Proceeding onwards in our search of religious extravagance, we
next come upon excesses of Tenderness and Charity.  Here
saintliness has to face the charge of preserving the unfit, and
breeding parasites and beggars.  “Resist not evil,” “Love your
enemies,” these are saintly maxims of which men of this world
find it hard to speak without impatience. Are the men of this
world right, or are the saints in possession of the deeper range
of truth?
No simple answer is possible.  Here, if anywhere, one feels the
complexity of the moral life, and the mysteriousness of the way
in which facts and ideals are interwoven.
Perfect conduct is a relation between three terms:  the actor,
the objects for which he acts, and the recipients of the action. 
In order that conduct should be abstractly perfect, all three
terms, intention, execution, and reception, should be suited to
one another.  The best intention will fail if it either work by
false means or address itself to the wrong recipient.  Thus no
critic or estimator of the value of conduct can confine himself
to the actor’s animus alone, apart from the other elements of the
performance.  As there is no worse lie than a truth misunderstood
by those who hear it, so reasonable arguments, challenges to
magnanimity, and appeals to sympathy or justice, are folly when
we are dealing with human crocodiles and boa-constrictors.  The
saint may simply give the universe into the hands of the enemy by
his trustfulness.  He may by non-resistance cut off his own
survival.
Herbert Spencer tells us that the perfect man’s conduct will
appear perfect only when the environment is perfect:  to no
inferior environment is it suitably adapted.  We may paraphrase
this by cordially admitting that saintly conduct would be the
most perfect conduct conceivable in an environment where all were
saints already; but by adding that in an environment where few
are saints, and many the exact reverse of saints, it must be ill
adapted.  We must frankly confess, then, using our empirical
common sense and ordinary practical prejudices, that in the world
that actually is, the virtues of sympathy, charity, and
non-resistance may be, and often have been, manifested in excess.
The powers of darkness have systematically taken advantage of
them.  The whole modern scientific organization of charity is a
consequence of the failure of simply giving alms.  The whole
history of constitutional government is a commentary on the
excellence of resisting evil, and when one cheek is smitten, of
smiting back and not turning the other cheek also.
You will agree to this in general, for in spite of the Gospel, in
spite of Quakerism, in spite of Tolstoi, you believe in fighting
fire with fire, in shooting down usurpers, locking up thieves,
and freezing out vagabonds and swindlers.
And yet you are sure, as I am sure, that were the world confined
to these hard-headed, hard-hearted, and hard-fisted methods
exclusively, were there no one prompt to help a brother first,
and find out afterwards whether he were worthy; no one willing to
drown his private wrongs in pity for the wronger’s person; no one
ready to be duped many a time rather than live always on
suspicion; no one glad to treat individuals passionately and
impulsively rather than by general rules of prudence; the world
would be an infinitely worse place than it is now to live in. 
The tender grace, not of a day that is dead, but of a day yet to
be born somehow, with the golden rule grown natural, would be cut
out from the perspective of our imaginations.
The saints, existing in this way, may, with their extravagances
of human tenderness, be prophetic.  Nay, innumerable times they
have proved themselves prophetic.  Treating those whom they met,
in spite of the past, in spite of all appearances, as worthy,
they have stimulated them to BE worthy, miraculously transformed
them by their radiant example and by the challenge of their
expectation.
From this point of view we may admit the human charity which we
find in all saints, and the great excess of it which we find in
some saints, to be a genuinely creative social force, tending to
make real a degree of virtue which it alone is ready to assume as
possible.  The saints are authors, auctores, increasers, of
goodness.  The potentialities of development in human souls are
unfathomable.  So many who seemed irretrievably hardened have in
point of fact been softened, converted, regenerated, in ways that
amazed the subjects even more than they surprised the spectators,
that we never can be sure in advance of any man that his
salvation by the way of love is hopeless.  We have no right to
speak of human crocodiles and boa-constrictors as of fixedly
incurable beings.  We know not the complexities of personality,
the smouldering emotional fires, the other facets of the
character-polyhedron, the resources of the subliminal region. 
St. Paul long ago made our ancestors familiar with the idea that
every soul is virtually sacred.  Since Christ died for us all
without exception, St. Paul said, we must despair of no one. 
This belief in the essential sacredness of every one expresses
itself to-day in all sorts of humane customs and reformatory
institutions, and in a growing aversion to the death penalty and
to brutality in punishment.  The saints, with their extravagance
of human tenderness, are the great torch-bearers of this belief,
the tip of the wedge, the clearers of the darkness.  Like the
single drops which sparkle in the sun as they are flung far ahead
of the advancing edge of a wave-crest or of a flood, they show
the way and are forerunners.  The world is not yet with them, so
they often seem in the midst of the world’s affairs to be
preposterous.  Yet they are impregnators of the world, vivifiers
and animaters of potentialities of goodness which but for them
would lie forever dormant.  It is not possible to be quite as
mean as we naturally are, when they have passed before us.  One
fire kindles another; and without that over-trust in human worth
which they show, the rest of us would lie in spiritual stagnancy.
Momentarily considered, then, the saint may waste his tenderness
and be the dupe and victim of his charitable fever, but the
general function of his charity in social evolution is vital and
essential.  If things are ever to move upward, some one must be
ready to take the first step, and assume the risk of it.  No one
who is not willing to try charity, to try non-resistance as the
saint is always willing, can tell whether these methods will or
will not succeed.  When they do succeed, they are far more
powerfully successful than force or worldly prudence.  Force
destroys enemies; and the best that can be said of prudence is
that it keeps what we already have in safety.  But
non-resistance, when successful, turns enemies into friends; and
charity regenerates its objects.  These saintly methods are, as I
said, creative energies; and genuine saints find in the elevated
excitement with which their faith endows them an authority and
impressiveness which makes them irresistible in situations where
men of shallower nature cannot get on at all without the use of
worldly prudence.  This practical proof that worldly wisdom may
be safely transcended is the saint’s magic gift to mankind.[215]
Not only does his vision of a better world console us for the
generally prevailing prose and barrenness; but even when on the
whole we have to confess him ill adapted, he makes some converts,
and the environment gets better for his ministry.  He is an
effective ferment of goodness, a slow transmuter of the earthly
into a more heavenly order.
[215]  The best missionary lives abound in the victorious
combination of non-resistance with personal authority.  John G. 
Paton, for example, in the New Hebrides, among brutish Melanesian
cannibals, preserves a charmed life by dint of it.  When it comes
to the point, no one ever dares actually to strike him.  Native
converts, inspired by him, showed analogous virtue.  “One of our
chiefs, full of the Christ-kindled desire to seek and to save,
sent a message to an inland chief, that he and four attendants
would come on Sabbath and tell them the gospel of Jehovah God. 
The reply came back sternly forbidding their visit, and
threatening with death any Christian that approached their
village.  Our chief sent in response a loving message, telling
them that Jehovah had taught the Christians to return good for
evil, and that they would come unarmed to tell them the story of
how the Son of God came into the world and died in order to bless
and save his enemies.  The heathen chief sent back a stern and
prompt reply once more:  ’If you come, you will be killed.’ On
Sabbath morn the Christian chief and his four companions were met
outside the village by the heathen chief, who implored and
threatened them once more. But the former said:–
“’We come to you without weapons of war! We come only to tell
you about Jesus.  We believe that He will protect us to-day.’
“As they pressed steadily forward towards the village, spears
began to be thrown at them.  Some they evaded, being all except
one dexterous warriors; and others they literally received with
their bare hands, and turned them aside in an incredible manner. 
The heathen, apparently thunderstruck at these men thus
approaching them without weapons of war, and not even flinging
back their own spears which they had caught, after having thrown
what the old chief called ’a shower of spears,’ desisted from
mere surprise.  Our Christian chief called out, as he and his
companions drew up in the midst of them on the village public
ground:–
“’Jehovah thus protects us.  He has given us all your spears!
Once we would have thrown them back at you and killed you.  But
now we come, not to fight but to tell you about Jesus.  He has
changed our dark hearts.  He asks you now to lay down all these
your other weapons of war, and to hear what we can tell you about
the love of God, our great Father, the only living God.’
“The heathen were perfectly overawed.  They manifestly looked on
these Christians as protected by some Invisible One.  They
listened for the first time to the story of the Gospel and of the
Cross.  We lived to see that chief and all his tribe sitting in
the school of Christ.  And there is perhaps not an island in
these southern seas, amongst all those won for Christ, where
similar acts of heroism on the part of converts cannot be
recited.”   John G. Paton, Missionary to the New Hebrides, An
Autobiography, second part, London, 1890, p. 243.
In this respect the Utopian dreams of social justice in which
many contemporary socialists and anarchists indulge are, in spite
of their impracticability and non-adaptation to present
environmental conditions, analogous to the saint’s belief in an
existent kingdom of heaven.  They help to break the edge of the
general reign of hardness and are slow leavens of a better order.
The next topic in order is Asceticism, which I fancy you are all
ready to consider without argument a virtue liable to
extravagance and excess.  The optimism and refinement of the
modern imagination has, as I have already said elsewhere, changed
the attitude of the church towards corporeal mortification, and a
Suso or a Saint Peter of Alcantara[216] appear to us to-day
rather in the light of tragic mountebanks than of sane men
inspiring us with respect.  If the inner dispositions are right,
we ask, what need of all this torment, this violation of the
outer nature?  It keeps the outer nature too important.  Any one
who is genuinely emancipated from the flesh will look on
pleasures and pains, abundance and privation, as alike irrelevant
and indifferent.  He can engage in actions and experience
enjoyments without fear of corruption or enslavement.  As the
Bhagavad-Gita says, only those need renounce worldly actions who
are still inwardly attached thereto.  If one be really unattached
to the fruits of action, one may mix in the world with
equanimity.  I quoted in a former lecture Saint Augustine’s
antinomian saying:  If you only love God enough, you may safely
follow all your inclinations.  “He needs no devotional
practices,” is one of Ramakrishna’s maxims, “whose heart is moved
to tears at the mere mention of the name of <354> Hari."[217] 
And the Buddha, in pointing out what he called “the middle way"
to his disciples, told them to abstain from both extremes,
excessive mortification being as unreal and unworthy as mere
desire and pleasure.  The only perfect life, he said, is that of
inner wisdom, which makes one thing as indifferent to us as
another, and thus leads to rest, to peace, and to Nirvana.[218]
[216] Saint Peter, Saint Teresa tells us in her autobiography
(French translation, p. 333), “had passed forty years without
ever sleeping more than an hour and a half a day.  Of all his
mortifications, this was the one that had cost him the most.  To
compass it, he kept always on his knees or on his feet.  The
little sleep he allowed nature to take was snatched in a sitting
posture, his head leaning against a piece of wood fixed in the
wall.  Even had he wished to lie down, it would have been
impossible, because his cell was only four feet and a half long. 
In the course of all these years he never raised his hood, no
matter what the ardor of the sun or the rain’s strength.  He
never put on a shoe.  He wore a garment of coarse sackcloth, with
nothing else upon his skin.  This garment was as scant as
possible, and over it a little cloak of the same stuff.  When the
cold was great he took off the cloak and opened for a while the
door and little window of his cell.  Then he closed them and
resumed the mantle–his way, as he told us, of warming himself,
and making his body feel a better temperature.  It was a frequent
thing with him to eat once only in three days; and when I
expressed my surprise, he said that it was very easy if one once
had acquired the habit.  One of his companions has assured me
that he has gone sometimes eight days without food. . . . His
poverty was extreme; and his mortification, even in his youth,
was such that he told me he had passed three years in a house of
his order without knowing any of the monks otherwise than by the
sound of their voice, for he never raised his eyes, and only
found his way about by following the others.  He showed this same
modesty on public highways.  He spent many years without ever
laying eyes upon a woman; but he confessed to me that at the age
he had reached it was indifferent to him whether he laid eyes on
them or not.  He was very old when I first came to know him, and
his body so attenuated that it seemed formed of nothing so much
as of so many roots of trees. With all this sanctity he was very
affable.  He never spoke unless he was questioned, but his
intellectual right-mindedness and grace gave to all his words an
irresistible charm.”
[217] F. Max Muller:  Ramakrishna, his Life and sayings, 1899, p.
180.
[218] Oldenberg:  Buddha; translated by W. Hoey, London, 1882, p.
127.
We find accordingly that as ascetic saints have grown older, and
directors of conscience more experienced, they usually have shown
a tendency to lay less stress on special bodily mortifications. 
Catholic teachers have always professed the rule that, since
health is needed for efficiency in God’s service, health must not
be sacrificed to mortification.  The general optimism and
healthy-mindedness of liberal Protestant circles to-day makes
mortification for mortification’s sake repugnant to us.  We can
no longer sympathize with cruel deities, and the notion that God
can take delight in the spectacle of sufferings self-inflicted in
his honor is abhorrent.  In consequence of all these motives you
probably are disposed, unless some special utility can be shown
in some individual’s discipline, to treat the general tendency to
asceticism as pathological.
Yet I believe that a more careful consideration of the whole
matter, distinguishing between the general good intention of
asceticism and the uselessness of some of the particular acts of
which it may be guilty, ought to rehabilitate it in our esteem. 
For in its spiritual meaning asceticism stands for nothing less
than for the essence of the twice-born philosophy.  It
symbolizes, lamely enough no doubt, but sincerely, the belief
that there is an element of real wrongness in this world, which
is neither to be ignored nor evaded, but which must be squarely
met and overcome by an appeal to the soul’s heroic resources, and
neutralized and cleansed away by suffering.  As against this
view, the ultra-optimistic form of the once-born philosophy
thinks we may treat evil by the method of ignoring.  Let a man
who, by fortunate health and circumstances, escapes the suffering
of any great amount of evil in his own person, also close his
eyes to it as it exists in the wider universe outside his private
experience, and he will be quit of it altogether, and can sail
through life happily on a healthy-minded basis.  But we saw in
our lectures on melancholy how precarious this attempt
necessarily is.  Moreover it is but for the individual; and
leaves the evil outside of him, unredeemed and unprovided for in
his philosophy.
No such attempt can be a GENERAL solution of the problem; and to
minds of sombre tinge, who naturally feel life as a tragic
mystery, such optimism is a shallow dodge or mean evasion.  It
accepts, in lieu of a real deliverance, what is a lucky personal
accident merely, a cranny to escape by. It leaves the general
world unhelped and still in the clutch of Satan.  The real
deliverance, the twice-born folk insist, must be of universal
application.  Pain and wrong and death must be fairly met and
overcome in higher excitement, or else their sting remains
essentially unbroken.  If one has ever taken the fact of the
prevalence of tragic death in this world’s history fairly into
his mind–freezing, drowning entombment alive, wild beasts, worse
men, and hideous diseases–he can with difficulty, it seems to
me, continue his own career of worldly prosperity without
suspecting that he may all the while not be really inside the
game, that he may lack the great initiation.
Well, this is exactly what asceticism thinks; and it voluntarily
takes the initiation.  Life is neither farce nor genteel comedy,
it says, but something we must sit at in mourning garments,
hoping its bitter taste will purge us of our folly. The wild and
the heroic are indeed such rooted parts of it that
healthy-mindedness pure and simple, with its sentimental
optimism, can hardly be regarded by any thinking man as a serious
solution.  Phrases of neatness, cosiness, and comfort can never
be an answer to the sphinx’s riddle.
In these remarks I am leaning only upon mankind’s common instinct
for reality, which in point of fact has always held the world to
be essentially a theatre for heroism.  In heroism, we feel,
life’s supreme mystery is hidden.  We tolerate no one who has no
capacity whatever for it in any direction.  On the other hand, no
matter what a man’s frailties otherwise may be, if he be willing
to risk death, and still more if he suffer it heroically, in the
service he has chosen, the fact consecrates him forever. 
Inferior to ourselves in this or that way, if yet we cling to
life, and he is able “to fling it away like a flower” as caring
nothing for it, we account him in the deepest way our born
superior.  Each of us in his own person feels that a high-hearted
indifference to life would expiate all his shortcomings.
The metaphysical mystery, thus recognized by common sense, that
he who feeds on death that feeds on men possesses life
supereminently and excellently, and meets best the secret demands
of the universe, is the truth of which asceticism has been the
faithful champion.  The folly of the cross, so inexplicable by
the intellect, has yet its indestructible vital meaning.
Representatively, then, and symbolically, and apart from the
vagaries into which the unenlightened intellect of former times
may have let it wander, asceticism must, I believe, be
acknowledged to go with the profounder way of handling the gift
of existence.  Naturalistic optimism is mere syllabub and
flattery and sponge-cake in comparison. The practical course of
action for us, as religious men, would therefore, it seems to me,
not be simply to turn our backs upon the ascetic impulse, as most
of us to-day turn them, but rather to discover some outlet for it
of which the fruits in the way of privation and hardship might be
objectively useful.  The older monastic asceticism occupied
itself with pathetic futilities, or terminated in the mere
egotism of the individual, increasing his own perfection.[219] 
But is it not possible for us to discard most of these older
forms of mortification, and yet find saner channels for the
heroism which inspired them?
[219] “The vanities of all others may die out, but the vanity of
a saint as regards his sainthood is hard indeed to wear away."
Ramakrishna his Life and Sayings, 1899, p. 172.
Does not, for example, the worship of material luxury and wealth,
which constitutes so large a portion of the “spirit” of our age,
make somewhat for effeminacy and unmanliness?  Is not the
exclusively sympathetic and facetious way in which most children
are brought up to-day–so different from the education of a
hundred years ago, especially in evangelical circles–in danger,
in spite of its many advantages, of developing a certain
trashiness of fibre?  Are there not hereabouts some points of
application for a renovated and revised ascetic discipline?
Many of you would recognize such dangers, but would point to
athletics, militarism, and individual and national enterprise and
adventure as the remedies.  These contemporary ideals are quite
as remarkable for the energy with which they make for heroic
standards of life, as contemporary religion is remarkable for the
way in which it neglects them.[220]  War and adventure assuredly
keep all who engage in them from treating themselves too
tenderly.  They demand such incredible efforts, depth beyond
depth of exertion, both in degree and in duration, that the whole
scale of motivation alters.  Discomfort and annoyance, hunger and
wet, pain and cold, squalor and filth, cease to have any
deterrent operation whatever.  Death turns into a commonplace
matter, and its usual power to check our action vanishes. With
the annulling of these customary inhibitions, ranges of new
energy are set free, and life seems cast upon a higher plane of
power.
[220] “When a church has to be run by oysters, ice-cream, and
fun,” I read in an American religious paper, “you may be sure
that it is running away from Christ.”  Such, if one may judge
by appearances, is the present plight of many of our churches.
The beauty of war in this respect is that it is so congruous with
ordinary human nature.  Ancestral evolution has made us all
potential warriors; so the most insignificant individual, when
thrown into an army in the field, is weaned from whatever excess
of tenderness toward his precious person he may bring with him,
and may easily develop into a monster of insensibility.
But when we compare the military type of self-severity with that
of the ascetic saint, we find a world-wide difference in all
their spiritual concomitants.
“’Live and let live,’” writes a clear-headed Austrian officer,
“is no device for an army.  Contempt for one’s own comrades, for
the troops of the enemy, and, above all, fierce contempt for
one’s own person, are what war demands of every one.  Far better
is it for an army to be too savage, too cruel, too barbarous,
than to possess too much sentimentality and human reasonableness.
If the soldier is to be good for anything as a soldier, he must
be exactly the opposite of a reasoning and thinking man.  The
measure of goodness in him is his possible use in war.  War, and
even peace, require of the soldier absolutely peculiar standards
of morality.  The recruit brings with him common moral notions,
of which he must seek immediately to get rid.  For him victory,
success, must be EVERYTHING.  The most barbaric tendencies in men
come to life again in war, and for war’s uses they are
incommensurably good."[221]
[221] C. V. B. K.:  Friedens-und Kriegs-moral der Heere.  Quoted
by Hamon:  Psychologie du Militaire professional, 1895, p. xli.
These words are of course literally true.  The immediate aim of
the soldier’s life is, as Moltke said, destruction, and nothing
but destruction; and whatever constructions wars result in are
remote and non-military.  Consequently the soldier cannot
train himself to be too feelingless to all those usual sympathies
and respects, whether for persons or for things, that make for
conservation.  Yet the fact remains that war is a school of
strenuous life and heroism; and, being in the line of aboriginal
instinct, is the only school that as yet is universally
available.  But when we gravely ask ourselves whether this
wholesale organization of irrationality and crime be our only
bulwark against effeminacy, we stand aghast at the thought, and
think more kindly of ascetic religion.  One hears of the
mechanical equivalent of heat.  What we now need to discover in
the social realm is the moral equivalent of war:  something
heroic that will speak to men as universally as war does, and yet
will be as compatible with their spiritual selves as war has
proved itself to be incompatible.  I have often thought that in
the old monkish poverty-worship, in spite of the pedantry which
infested it, there might be something like that moral equivalent
of war which we are seeking.  May not voluntarily accepted
poverty be “the strenuous life,” without the need of crushing
weaker peoples?
Poverty indeed IS the strenuous life–without brass bands or
uniforms or hysteric popular applause or lies or circumlocutions;
and when one sees the way in which wealth- getting enters as an
ideal into the very bone and marrow of our generation, one
wonders whether a revival of the belief that poverty is a worthy
religious vocation may not be “the transformation of military
courage,” and the spiritual reform which our time stands most in
need of.
Among us English-speaking peoples especially do the praises of
poverty need once more to be boldly sung.  We have grown
literally afraid to be poor.  We despise any one who elects to be
poor in order to simplify and save his inner life.  If he does
not join the general scramble and pant with the money-making
street, we deem him spiritless and lacking in ambition.  We have
lost the power even of imagining what the ancient idealization of
poverty could have meant:  the liberation from material
attachments, the unbribed soul, the manlier indifference, the
paying our way by what we are or do and not by what we have, the
right to fling away our life at any moment irresponsibly–the
more athletic trim, in short, the moral fighting shape.  When we
of the so-called better classes are scared as men were never
scared in history at material ugliness and hardship; when we put
off marriage until our house can be artistic, and quake at the
thought of having a child without a bank-account and doomed to
manual labor, it is time for thinking men to protest against so
unmanly and irreligious a state of opinion.
It is true that so far as wealth gives time for ideal ends and
exercise to ideal energies, wealth is better than poverty and
ought to be chosen.  But wealth does this in only a portion of
the actual cases.  Elsewhere the desire to gain wealth and the
fear to lose it are our chief breeders of cowardice and
propagators of corruption.  There are thousands of conjunctures
in which a wealth-bound man must be a slave, whilst a man for
whom poverty has no terrors becomes a freeman.  Think of the
strength which personal indifference to poverty would give us if
we were devoted to unpopular causes.  We need no longer hold our
tongues or fear to vote the revolutionary or reformatory ticket. 
Our stocks might fall, our hopes of promotion vanish, our
salaries stop, our club doors close in our faces; yet, while we
lived, we would imperturbably bear witness to the spirit, and our
example would help to set free our generation.  The cause would
need its funds, but we its servants would be potent in proportion
as we personally were contented with our poverty.
I recommend this matter to your serious pondering, for it is
certain that the prevalent fear of poverty among the educated
classes is the worst moral disease from which our civilization
suffers.
I have now said all that I can usefully say about the several
fruits of religion as they are manifested in saintly lives, so I
will make a brief review and pass to my more general conclusions.
Our question, you will remember, is as to whether religion stands
approved by its fruits, as these are exhibited in the saintly
type of character.  Single attributes of saintliness may, it is
true, be temperamental endowments, found in non-religious
individuals.  But the whole group of them forms a combination
which, as such, is religious, for it seems to flow from the sense
of the divine as from its psychological centre.  Whoever
possesses strongly this sense comes naturally to think that the
smallest details of this world derive infinite significance from
their relation to an unseen divine order.  The thought of this
order yields him a superior denomination of happiness, and a
steadfastness of soul with which no other can compare.  In social
relations his serviceability is exemplary; he abounds in impulses
to help. His help is inward as well as outward, for his sympathy
reaches souls as well as bodies, and kindles unsuspected
faculties therein.  Instead of placing happiness where common men
place it, in comfort, he places it in a higher kind of inner
excitement, which converts discomforts into sources of cheer and
annuls unhappiness.  So he turns his back upon no duty, however
thankless; and when we are in need of assistance, we can count
upon the saint lending his hand with more certainty than we can
count upon any other person.  Finally, his humble-mindedness and
his ascetic tendencies save him from the petty personal
pretensions which so obstruct our ordinary social intercourse,
and his purity gives us in him a clean man for a companion. 
Felicity, purity, charity, patience, self-severity–these are
splendid excellencies, and the saint of all men shows them in the
completest possible measure.
But, as we saw, all these things together do not make saints
infallible.  When their intellectual outlook is narrow, they fall
into all sorts of holy excesses, fanaticism or theopathic
absorption, self-torment, prudery, scrupulosity, gullibility, and
morbid inability to meet the world.  By the very intensity of his
fidelity to the paltry ideals with which an inferior intellect
may inspire him, a saint can be even more objectionable and
damnable than a superficial carnal man would be in the same
situation.  We must judge him not sentimentally only, and not in
isolation, but using our own intellectual standards, placing him
in his environment, and estimating his total function.
Now in the matter of intellectual standards, we must bear in mind
that it is unfair, where we find narrowness of mind, always to
impute it as a vice to the individual, for in religious and
theological matters he probably absorbs his narrowness from his
generation.  Moreover, we must not confound the essentials of
saintliness, which are those general passions of which I have
spoken, with its accidents, which are the special determinations
of these passions at any historical moment.  In these
determinations the saints will usually be loyal to the temporary
idols of their tribe.  Taking refuge in monasteries was as much
an idol of the tribe in the middle ages, as bearing a hand in the
world’s work is to-day.  Saint Francis or Saint Bernard, were
they living to-day, would undoubtedly be leading consecrated
lives of some sort, but quite as undoubtedly they would not lead
them in retirement.  Our animosity to special historic
manifestations must not lead us to give away the saintly impulses
in their essential nature to the tender mercies of inimical
critics.
The most inimical critic of the saintly impulses whom I know is
Nietzsche.  He contrasts them with the worldly passions as we
find these embodied in the predaceous military character,
altogether to the advantage of the latter.  Your born saint, it
must be confessed, has something about him which often makes the
gorge of a carnal man rise, so it will be worth while to consider
the contrast in question more fully.
Dislike of the saintly nature seems to be a negative result of
the biologically useful instinct of welcoming leadership, and
glorifying the chief of the tribe.  The chief is the potential,
if not the actual tyrant, the masterful, overpowering man of
prey.  We confess our inferiority and grovel before him.  We
quail under his glance, and are at the same time proud of owning
so dangerous a lord.  Such instinctive and submissive
hero-worship must have been indispensable in primeval tribal
life.  In the endless wars of those times, leaders were
absolutely needed for the tribe’s survival.  If there were any
tribes who owned no leaders, they can have left no issue to
narrate their doom.  The leaders always had good consciences, for
conscience in them coalesced with will, and those who looked on
their face were as much smitten with wonder at their freedom from
inner restraint as with awe at the energy of their outward
performances.
Compared with these beaked and taloned graspers of the world,
saints are herbivorous animals, tame and harmless barn-yard
poultry.  There are saints whose beard you may, if you ever care
to, pull with impunity.  Such a man excites no thrills of wonder
veiled in terror; his conscience is full of scruples and returns;
he stuns us neither by his inward freedom nor his outward power;
and unless he found within us an altogether different faculty of
admiration to appeal to, we should pass him by with contempt.
In point of fact, he does appeal to a different faculty.
Reenacted in human nature is the fable of the wind, the sun, and
the traveler.  The sexes embody the discrepancy.  The woman loves
the man the more admiringly the stormier he shows himself, and
the world deifies its rulers the more for being willful and
unaccountable.  But the woman in turn subjugates the man by the
mystery of gentleness in beauty, and the saint has always charmed
the world by something similar.  Mankind is susceptible and
suggestible in opposite directions, and the rivalry of influences
is unsleeping.  The saintly and the worldly ideal pursue their
feud in literature as much as in real life.
For Nietzsche the saint represents little but sneakingness and
slavishness.  He is the sophisticated invalid, the degenerate par
excellence, the man of insufficient vitality.  His prevalence
would put the human type in danger.
“The sick are the greatest danger for the well.  The weaker, not
the stronger, are the strong’s undoing.  It is not FEAR of our
fellow-man, which we should wish to see diminished; for fear
rouses those who are strong to become terrible in turn
themselves, and preserves the hard-earned and successful type of
humanity. What is to be dreaded by us more than any other doom is
not fear, but rather the great disgust, not fear, but rather the
great pity–disgust and pity for our human fellows. . . .  The
MORBID are our greatest peril–not the ’bad’ men, not the
predatory beings.  Those born wrong, the miscarried, the broken–
they it is, the WEAKEST who are undermining the vitality of the
race, poisoning our trust in life, and putting humanity in
question. Every look of them is a sigh–’Would I were something
other!  I am sick and tired of what I am.’  In this swamp-soil of
self-contempt, every poisonous weed flourishes, and all so small,
so secret, so dishonest, and so sweetly rotten.  Here swarm the
worms of sensitiveness and resentment, here the air smells odious
with secrecy, with what is not to be acknowledged; here is woven
endlessly the net of the meanest of conspiracies, the conspiracy
of those who suffer against those who succeed and are victorious;
here the very aspect of the victorious is hated–as if health,
success, strength, pride, and the sense of power were in
themselves things vicious, for which one ought eventually to make
bitter expiation.  Oh, how these people would themselves like to
inflict the expiation, how they thirst to be the hangmen!  And
all the while their duplicity never confesses their hatred to
be hatred."[222]
[222] Zur Genealogie der Moral, Dritte Abhandlung, Section 14.  I
have abridged, and in one place transposed, a sentence.
Poor Nietzsche’s antipathy is itself sickly enough, but we all
know what he means, and he expresses well the clash between the
two Ideals.  The carnivorous-minded “strong man,” the adult male
and cannibal, can see nothing but mouldiness and morbidness in
the saint’s gentleness and self-severity, and regards him with
pure loathing.  The whole feud revolves essentially upon two
pivots:  Shall the seen world or the unseen world be our chief
sphere of adaptation?  and must our means of adaptation in this
seen world be aggressiveness or non-resistance?
The debate is serious.  In some sense and to some degree both
worlds must be acknowledged and taken account of; and in the seen
world both aggressiveness and non-resistance are needful.  It is
a question of emphasis, of more or less.  Is the saint’s type or
the strong-man’s type the more ideal?
It has often been supposed, and even now, I think, it is supposed
by most persons, that there can be one intrinsically ideal type
of human character.  A certain kind of man, it is imagined, must
be the best man absolutely and apart from the utility of his
function, apart from economical considerations.  The saint’s
type, and the knight’s or gentleman’s type, have always been
rival claimants of this absolute ideality; and in the ideal of
military religious orders both types were in a manner blended. 
According to the empirical philosophy, however, all ideals are
matters of relation.  It would be absurd, for example, to ask for
a definition of “the ideal horse,” so long as dragging drays and
running races, bearing children, and jogging about with
tradesmen’s packages all remain as indispensable differentiations
of equine function.  You may take what you call a general
all-round animal as a compromise, but he will be inferior to any
horse of a more specialized type, in some one particular
direction. We must not forget this now when, in discussing
saintliness, we ask if it be an ideal type of manhood.  We must
test it by its economical relations.
I think that the method which Mr. Spencer uses in his Data of
Ethics will help to fix our opinion.  Ideality in conduct is
altogether a matter of adaptation.  A society where all were
invariably aggressive would destroy itself by inner friction, and
in a society where some are aggressive, others must be
non-resistant, if there is to be any kind of order. This is the
present constitution of society, and to the mixture we owe many
of our blessings.  But the aggressive members of society are
always tending to become bullies, robbers, and swindlers; and no
one believes that such a state of things as we now live in is the
millennium.  It is meanwhile quite possible to conceive an
imaginary society in which there should be no aggressiveness, but
only sympathy and fairness–any small community of true friends
now realizes such a society.  Abstractly considered, such a
society on a large scale would be the millennium, for every good
thing might be realized there with no expense of friction.  To
such a millennial society the saint would be entirely adapted. 
His peaceful modes of appeal would be efficacious over his
companions, and there would be no one extant to take advantage of
his non-resistance.  The saint is therefore abstractly a higher
type of man than the “strong man,” because he is adapted to the
highest society conceivable, whether that society ever be
concretely possible or not.  The strong man would immediately
tend by his presence to make that society deteriorate.  It would
become inferior in everything save in a certain kind of bellicose
excitement, dear to men as they now are.
But if we turn from the abstract question to the actual
situation, we find that the individual saint may be well or ill
adapted, according to particular circumstances.  There is, in
short, no absoluteness in the excellence of sainthood.  It must
be confessed that as far as this world goes, anyone who makes an
out-and-out saint of himself does so at his peril.  If he is not
a large enough man, he may appear more insignificant and
contemptible, for all his saintship, than if he had remained a
worldling.[223]  Accordingly religion has seldom been so
radically taken in our Western world that the devotee could not
mix it with some worldly temper. It has always found good men who
could follow most of its impulses, but who stopped short when it
came to non-resistance.  Christ himself was fierce upon occasion. 
Cromwells, Stonewall Jacksons, Gordons, show that Christians can
be strong men also.
[223] We all know DAFT saints, and they inspire a queer kind of
aversion. But in comparing saints with strong men we must choose
individuals on the same intellectual level.  The under-witted
strong man homologous in his sphere with the under-witted saint,
is the bully of the slums, the hooligan or rowdy.  Surely on this
level also the saint preserves a certain superiority.
How is success to be absolutely measured when there are so many
environments and so many ways of looking at the adaptation?  It
cannot be measured absolutely; the verdict will vary according to
the point of view adopted.  From the biological point of view
Saint Paul was a failure, because he was beheaded.  Yet he was
magnificently adapted to the larger environment of history; and
so far as any saint’s example is a leaven of righteousness in the
world, and draws it in the direction of more prevalent habits of
saintliness, he is a success, no matter what his immediate bad
fortune may be.  The greatest saints, the spiritual heroes whom
every one acknowledges, the Francises, Bernards, Luthers,
Loyolas, Wesleys, Channings, Moodys, Gratrys, the Phillips
Brookses, the Agnes Joneses, Margaret Hallahans, and Dora
Pattisons, are successes from the outset.  They show themselves,
and there is no question; every one perceives their strength and
stature.  Their sense of mystery in things, their passion, their
goodness, irradiate about them and enlarge their outlines while
they soften them.  They are like pictures with an atmosphere and
background; and, placed alongside of them, the strong men of this
world and no other seem as dry as sticks, as hard and crude as
blocks of stone or brick-bats.
In a general way, then, and “on the whole,"[224] our abandonment
of theological criteria, and our testing of religion by practical
common sense and the empirical method, leave it in possession of
its towering place in history.  Economically, the saintly group
of qualities is indispensable to the world’s welfare.  The great
saints are immediate successes; the smaller ones are at least
heralds and harbingers, and they may be leavens also, of a better
mundane order.  Let us be saints, then, if we can, whether or not
we succeed visibly and temporally.  But in our Father’s house are
many mansions, and each of us must discover for himself the kind
of religion and the amount of saintship which best comports with
what he believes to be his powers and feels to be his truest
mission and vocation.  There are no successes to be guaranteed
and no set orders to be given to individuals, so long as we
follow the methods of empirical philosophy.
[224] See above, p. 321.
This is my conclusion so far.  I know that on some of your minds
it leaves a feeling of wonder that such a method should have been
applied to such a subject, and this in spite of all those remarks
about empiricism which I made at the beginning of Lecture
XIII.[225] How, you say, can religion, which believes in two
worlds and an invisible order, be estimated by the adaptation of
its fruits to this world’s order alone?  It is its truth, not its
utility, you insist, upon which our verdict ought to depend.  If
religion is true, its fruits are good fruits, even though in this
world they should prove uniformly ill adapted and full of naught
but pathos.  It goes back, then, after all, to the question of
the truth of theology. The plot inevitably thickens upon us; we
cannot escape theoretical considerations.  I propose, then, that
to some degree we face the responsibility.  Religious persons
have often, though not uniformly, professed to see truth in a
special manner.  That manner is known as mysticism.  I will
consequently now proceed to treat at some length of mystical
phenomena, and after that, though more briefly, I will consider
religious philosophy.
[225] Above, pp. 321-327
Continue...

This electronic book of The Varieties of Religious Experience (A Study in Human Nature) by William James is in the public domain.
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on December 2003.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
