




Were one asked to characterize the life of religion in the
broadest and most general terms possible, one might say that it
consists of the belief that there is an unseen order, and that
our supreme good lies in harmoniously adjusting ourselves
thereto.  This belief and this adjustment are the religious
attitude in the soul.  I wish during this hour to call your
attention to some of the psychological peculiarities of such an
attitude as this, or belief in an object which we cannot see. 
All our attitudes, moral, practical, or emotional, as well as
religious, are due to the “objects” of our consciousness, the
things which we believe to exist, whether really or ideally,
along with ourselves.  Such objects may be present to our senses,
or they may be present only to our thought.  In either case they
elicit from us a REACTION; and the reaction due to things of
thought is notoriously in many cases as strong as that due to
sensible presences.  It may be even stronger.  The memory of an
insult may make us angrier than the insult did when we received
it.  We are frequently more ashamed of our blunders afterwards
than we were at the moment of making them; and in general our
whole higher prudential and moral life is based on the fact that
material sensations actually present may have a weaker influence
on our action than ideas of remoter facts.
The more concrete objects of most men’s religion, the deities
whom they worship, are known to them only in idea.  It has been
vouchsafed, for example, to very few Christian believers to have
had a sensible vision of their Saviour; though enough appearances
of this sort are on record, by way of miraculous exception, to
merit our attention later.  The whole force of the Christian
religion, therefore, so far as belief in the divine personages
determines the prevalent attitude of the believer, is in general
exerted by the instrumentality of pure ideas, of which nothing in
the individual’s past experience directly serves as a model.
But in addition to these ideas of the more concrete religious
objects, religion is full of abstract objects which prove to have
an equal power.  God’s attributes as such, his holiness, his
justice, his mercy, his absoluteness, his infinity, his
omniscience, his tri-unity, the various mysteries of the
redemptive process, the operation of the sacraments, etc., have
proved fertile wells of inspiring meditation for Christian
believers.[21] We shall see later that the absence of definite
sensible images is positively insisted on by the mystical
authorities in all religions as the sine qua non of a successful
orison, or contemplation of the higher divine truths. Such
contemplations are expected (and abundantly verify the
expectation, as we shall also see) to influence the believer’s
subsequent attitude very powerfully for good.
[21] Example:  “I have had much comfort lately in meditating on
the passages which show the personality of the Holy Ghost, and
his distinctness from the Father and the Son.  It is a subject
that requires searching into to find out, but, when realized,
gives one so much more true and lively a sense of the fullness of
the Godhead, and its work in us and to us, than when only
thinking of the Spirit in its effect on us.”  Augustus Hare: 
Memorials, i. 244, Maria Hare to Lucy H. Hare.
Immanuel Kant held a curious doctrine about such objects of
belief as God, the design of creation, the soul, its freedom, and
the life hereafter.  These things, he said, are properly not
objects of knowledge at all.  Our conceptions always require a
sense-content to work with, and as the words soul,”  “God,"
“immortality,” cover no distinctive sense-content whatever, it
follows that theoretically speaking they are words devoid of any
significance.  Yet strangely enough they have a definite meaning
FOR OUR PRACTICE.  We can act AS IF there were a God; feel AS IF
we were free; consider Nature AS IF she were full of special
designs; lay plans AS IF we were to be immortal; and we find then
that these words do make a genuine difference in our moral life. 
Our faith THAT these unintelligible objects actually exist proves
thus to be a full equivalent in praktischer Hinsicht, as Kant
calls it, or from the point of view of our action, for a
knowledge of WHAT they might be, in case we were permitted
positively to conceive them.  So we have the strange phenomenon,
as Kant assures us, of a mind believing with all its strength in
the real presence of a set of things of no one of which it can
form any notion whatsoever.
My object in thus recalling Kant’s doctrine to your mind is not
to express any opinion as to the accuracy of this particularly
uncouth part of his philosophy, but only to illustrate the
characteristic of human nature which we are considering, by an
example so classical in its exaggeration.  The sentiment of
reality can indeed attach itself so strongly to our object of
belief that our whole life is polarized through and through, so
to speak, by its sense of the existence of the thing believed in,
and yet that thing, for purpose of definite description, can
hardly be said to be present to our mind at all.  It is as if a
bar of iron, without touch or sight, with no representative
faculty whatever, might nevertheless be strongly endowed with an
inner capacity for magnetic feeling; and as if, through the
various arousals of its magnetism by magnets coming and going in
its neighborhood, it might be consciously determined to different
attitudes and tendencies. Such a bar of iron could never give you
an outward description of the agencies that had the power of
stirring it so strongly; yet of their presence, and of their
significance for its life, it would be intensely aware through
every fibre of its being.
It is not only the Ideas of pure Reason as Kant styled them, that
have this power of making us vitally feel presences that we are
impotent articulately to describe.  All sorts of higher
abstractions bring with them the same kind of impalpable appeal. 
Remember those passages from Emerson which I read at my last
lecture.  The whole universe of concrete objects, as we know
them, swims, not only for such a transcendentalist writer, but
for all of us, in a wider and higher universe of abstract ideas,
that lend it its significance.  As time, space, and the ether
soak through all things so (we feel) do abstract and essential
goodness, beauty, strength, significance, justice, soak through
all things good, strong, significant, and just.
Such ideas, and others equally abstract, form the background for
all our facts, the fountain-head of all the possibilities we
conceive of.  They give its “nature,” as we call it, to every
special thing.  Everything we know is “what” it is by sharing in
the nature of one of these abstractions.  We can never look
directly at them, for they are bodiless and featureless and
footless, but we grasp all other things by their means, and in
handling the real world we should be stricken with helplessness
in just so far forth as we might lose these mental objects, these
adjectives and adverbs and predicates and heads of classification
and conception.
This absolute determinability of our mind by abstractions is one
of the cardinal facts in our human constitution. Polarizing and
magnetizing us as they do, we turn towards them and from them, we
seek them, hold them, hate them, bless them, just as if they were
so many concrete beings. And beings they are, beings as real in
the realm which they inhabit as the changing things of sense are
in the realm of space.
Plato gave so brilliant and impressive a defense of this common
human feeling, that the doctrine of the reality of abstract
objects has been known as the platonic theory of ideas ever
since.  Abstract Beauty, for example, is for Plato a perfectly
definite individual being, of which the intellect is aware as of
something additional to all the perishing beauties of the earth. 
“The true order of going,” he says, in the often quoted passage
in his “Banquet,” “is to use the beauties of earth as steps along
which one mounts upwards for the sake of that other Beauty, going
from one to two, and from two to all fair forms, and from fair
forms to fair actions, and from fair actions to fair notions,
until from fair notions, he arrives at the notion of absolute
Beauty, and at last knows what the essence of Beauty is."[22]  In
our last lecture we had a glimpse of the way in which a
platonizing writer like Emerson may treat the abstract divineness
of things, the moral structure of the universe, as a fact worthy
of worship.  In those various churches without a God which to-day
are spreading through the world under the name of ethical
societies, we have a similar worship of the abstract divine, the
moral law believed in as an ultimate object.  “Science” in many
minds is genuinely taking the place of a religion.  Where this is
so, the scientist treats the “Laws of Nature” as objective facts
to be revered.  A brilliant school of interpretation of Greek
mythology would have it that in their origin the Greek gods were
only half-metaphoric personifications of those great spheres of
abstract law and order into which the natural world falls
apart–the sky-sphere, the ocean-sphere, the earth-sphere, and
the like; just as even now we may speak of the smile of the
morning, the kiss of the breeze, or the bite of the cold, without
really meaning that these phenomena of nature actually wear a
human face.[23]
[22] Symposium, Jowett, 1871, i.  527.
[23] Example:  “Nature is always so interesting, under whatever
aspect she shows herself, that when it rains, I seem to see a
beautiful woman weeping.  She appears the more beautiful, the
more afflicted she is.”   B. de St. Pierre.
As regards the origin of the Greek gods, we need not at present
seek an opinion.  But the whole array of our instances leads to a
conclusion something like this:  It is as if there were in the
human consciousness a sense of reality, a feeling of objective
presence, a perception of what we may call “something there,"
more deep and more general than any of the special and particular
“senses” by which the current psychology supposes existent
realities to be originally revealed.  If this were so, we might
suppose the senses to waken our attitudes and conduct as they so
habitually do, by first exciting this sense of reality; but
anything else, any idea, for example, that might similarly excite
it, would have that same prerogative of appearing real which
objects of sense normally possess.  So far as religious
conceptions were able to touch this reality-feeling, they would
be believed in in spite of criticism, even though they might be
so vague and remote as to be almost unimaginable, even though
they might be such non-entities in point of WHATNESS, as Kant
makes the objects of his moral theology to be.
The most curious proofs of the existence of such an
undifferentiated sense of reality as this are found in
experiences of hallucination.  It often happens that an
hallucination is imperfectly developed:  the person affected will
feel a “presence” in the room, definitely localized, facing in
one particular way, real in the most emphatic sense of the word,
often coming suddenly, and as suddenly gone; and yet neither
seen, heard, touched, nor cognized in any of the usual “sensible"
ways.  Let me give you an example of this, before I pass to the
objects with whose presence religion is more peculiarly
concerned.
An intimate friend of mine, one of the keenest intellects I know,
has had several experiences of this sort.  He writes as follows
in response to my inquiries:–<59>
“I have several times within the past few years felt the so-
called ’consciousness of a presence.’  The experiences which I
have in mind are clearly distinguishable from another kind of
experience which I have had very frequently, and which I fancy
many persons would also call the ’consciousness of a presence.’
But the difference for me between the two sets of experience is
as great as the difference between feeling a slight warmth
originating I know not where, and standing in the midst of a
conflagration with all the ordinary senses alert.
“It was about September, 1884, when I had the first experience.
On the previous night I had had, after getting into bed at my
rooms in College, a vivid tactile hallucination of being grasped
by the arm, which made me get up and search the room for an
intruder; but the sense of presence properly so called came on
the next night.  After I had got into bed and blown out the
candle, I lay awake awhile thinking on the previous night’s
experience, when suddenly I FELT something come into the room and
stay close to my bed.  It remained only a minute or two.  I did
not recognize it by any ordinary sense and yet there was a
horribly unpleasant ’sensation’ connected with it.  It stirred
something more at the roots of my being than any ordinary
perception.  The feeling had something of the quality of a very
large tearing vital pain spreading chiefly over the chest, but
within the organism–and yet the feeling was not PAIN so much as
ABHORRENCE.  At all events, something was present with me, and I
knew its presence far more surely than I have ever known the
presence of any fleshly living creature.  I was conscious of its
departure as of its coming:  an almost instantaneously swift
going through the door, and the ’horrible sensation’ disappeared.
“On the third night when I retired my mind was absorbed in some
lectures which I was preparing, and I was still absorbed in these
when I became aware of the actual presence (though not of the
COMING) of the thing that was there the night before, and of the
’horrible sensation.’ I then mentally concentrated all my effort
to charge this ’thing,’ if it was evil to depart, if it was NOT
evil, to tell me who or what it was, and if it could not explain
itself, to go, and that I would compel it <60> to go.  It went
as on the previous night, and my body quickly recovered its
normal state.
“On two other occasions in my life I have had precisely the same
’horrible sensation.’  Once it lasted a full quarter of an hour. 
In all three instances the certainty that there in outward space
there stood SOMETHING was indescribably STRONGER than the
ordinary certainty of companionship when we are in the close
presence of ordinary living people.  The something seemed close
to me, and intensely more real than any ordinary perception.
Although I felt it to be like unto myself so to speak, or finite,
small, and distressful, as it were, I didn’t recognize it as any
individual being or person.”
Of course such an experience as this does not connect itself with
the religious sphere.  Yet it may upon occasion do so; and the
same correspondent informs me that at more than one other
conjuncture he had the sense of presence developed with equal
intensity and abruptness, only then it was filled with a quality
of joy.
“There was not a mere consciousness of something there, but fused
in the central happiness of it, a startling awareness of some
ineffable good.  Not vague either, not like the emotional effect
of some poem, or scene, or blossom, of music, but the sure
knowledge of the close presence of a sort of mighty person, and
after it went, the memory persisted as the one perception of
reality.  Everything else might be a dream, but not that.”
My friend, as it oddly happens, does not interpret these latter
experiences theistically, as signifying the presence of God.  But
it would clearly not have been unnatural to interpret them as a
revelation of the deity’s existence.  When we reach the subject
of mysticism, we shall have much more to say upon this head.
Lest the oddity of these phenomena should disconcert you, I will
venture to read you a couple of similar narratives, much shorter,
merely to show that we are dealing with a well-marked natural
kind of fact.  In the first case, which I <61> take from the
Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, the sense of
presence developed in a few moments into a distinctly
visualized hallucination–but I leave that part of the story out.
“I had read,” the narrator says, “some twenty minutes or so, was
thoroughly absorbed in the book, my mind was perfectly quiet, and
for the time being my friends were quite forgotten, when suddenly
without a moment’s warning my whole being seemed roused to the
highest state of tension or aliveness, and I was aware, with an
intenseness not easily imagined by those who had never
experienced it, that another being or presence was not only in
the room, but quite close to me.  I put my book down, and
although my excitement was great, I felt quite collected, and not
conscious of any sense of fear.  Without changing my position,
and looking straight at the fire, I knew somehow that my friend
A. H. was standing at my left elbow but so far behind me as to be
hidden by the armchair in which I was leaning back.  Moving my
eyes round slightly without otherwise changing my position, the
lower portion of one leg became visible, and I instantly
recognized the gray-blue material of trousers he often wore, but
the stuff appeared semitransparent, reminding me of tobacco smoke
in consistency,"[24]– and hereupon the visual hallucination
came.
[24] Journal of the S. P. R., February, 1895, p. 26.
Another informant writes:–
“Quite early in the night I was awakened. . . . I felt as if I
had been aroused intentionally, and at first thought some one was
breaking into the house. . . . I then turned on my side to go to
sleep again, and immediately felt a consciousness of a presence
in the room, and singular to state, it was not the consciousness
of a live person, but of a spiritual presence.  This may provoke
a smile, but I can only tell you the facts as they occurred to
me.  I do not know how to better describe my sensations than by
simply stating that I felt a consciousness of a spiritual
presence. . . .  I felt also at the same time a strong feeling of
superstitious dread, as if something strange and fearful were
about to happen."[25]
[25] E. Gurney:  Phantasms of the Living, i. 384.
Professor Flournoy of Geneva gives me the following testimony of
a friend of his, a lady, who has the gift of automatic or
involuntary writing:–
“Whenever I practice automatic writing, what makes me feel that
it is not due to a subconscious self is the feeling I always have
of a foreign presence, external to my body.  It is sometimes so
definitely characterized that I could point to its exact
position.  This impression of presence is impossible to describe.
It varies in intensity and clearness according to the personality
from whom the writing professes to come.  If it is some one whom
I love, I feel it immediately, before any writing has come.  My
heart seems to recognize it.”
In an earlier book of mine I have cited at full length a curious
case of presence felt by a blind man.  The presence was that of
the figure of a gray-bearded man dressed in a pepper and salt
suit, squeezing himself under the crack of the door and moving
across the floor of the room towards a sofa.  The blind subject
of this quasi-hallucination is an exceptionally intelligent
reporter.  He is entirely without internal visual imagery and
cannot represent light or colors to himself, and is positive that
his other senses, hearing, etc., were not involved in this false
perception.  It seems to have been an abstract conception rather,
with the feelings of reality and spatial outwardness directly
attached to it–in other words, a fully objectified and
exteriorized IDEA.
Such cases, taken along with others which would be too tedious
for quotation, seem sufficiently to prove the existence in our
mental machinery of a sense of present reality more diffused and
general than that which our special senses yield.  For the
psychologists the tracing of the organic seat of such a feeling
would form a pretty problem–nothing could be more natural than
to connect it with the muscular sense, with the feeling that our
muscles were innervating themselves for action.  Whatsoever thus
innervated our activity, or “made our flesh creep"–our senses
are what do so oftenest–might then appear real and present, even
though it were but an abstract idea.  But with such vague
conjectures we have no concern at present, for our interest lies
with the faculty rather than with its organic seat.
Like all positive affections of consciousness, the sense of
reality has its negative counterpart in the shape of a feeling of
unreality by which persons may be haunted, and of which one
sometimes hears complaint:–
“When I reflect on the fact that I have made my appearance by
accident upon a globe itself whirled through space as the sport
of the catastrophes of the heavens,” says Madame Ackermann; “when
I see myself surrounded by beings as ephemeral and
incomprehensible as I am myself, and all excitedly pursuing pure
chimeras, I experience a strange feeling of being in a dream.  It
seems to me as if I have loved and suffered and that erelong I
shall die, in a dream.  My last word will be, ’I have been
dreaming.’"[26]
[26] Pensees d’un Solitaire, p. 66.
In another lecture we shall see how in morbid melancholy this
sense of the unreality of things may become a carking pain, and
even lead to suicide.
We may now lay it down as certain that in the distinctively
religious sphere of experience, many persons (how many we cannot
tell) possess the objects of their belief, not in the form of
mere conceptions which their intellect accepts as true, but
rather in the form of quasi-sensible realities directly
apprehended.  As his sense of the real presence of these objects
fluctuates, so the believer alternates between warmth and
coldness in his faith.  Other examples will bring this home to
one better than abstract description, so I proceed immediately to
cite some.  The first example is a negative one, deploring the
loss of the sense in question.  I have extracted it from an
account given me by a scientific man of my acquaintance, of his
religious life.  It seems to me to show clearly that the feeling
of reality may be something more like a sensation than an
intellectual operation properly so-called.
“Between twenty and thirty I gradually became more and more
agnostic and irreligious, yet I cannot say that I ever lost that
’indefinite consciousness’ which Herbert Spencer describes so
well, of an Absolute Reality behind phenomena.  For me this
Reality was not the pure Unknowable of Spencer’s philosophy, for
although I had ceased my childish prayers to God, and never
prayed to IT in a formal manner, yet my more recent experience
shows me to have been in a relation to IT which practically was
the same thing as prayer.  Whenever I had any trouble, especially
when I had conflict with other people, either domestically or in
the way of business, or when I was depressed in spirits or
anxious about affairs, I now recognize that I used to fall back
for support upon this curious relation I felt myself to be in to
this fundamental cosmical IT.  It was on my side, or I was on Its
side, however you please to term it, in the particular trouble,
and it always strengthened me and seemed to give me endless
vitality to feel its underlying and supporting presence.  In
fact, it was an unfailing fountain of living justice, truth, and
strength, to which I instinctively turned at times of weakness,
and it always brought me out.  I know now that it was a personal
relation I was in to it, because of late years the power of
communicating with it has left me, and I am conscious of a
perfectly definite loss.  I used never to fail to find it when I
turned to it.  Then came a set of years when sometimes I found
it, and then again I would be wholly unable to make connection
with it.  I remember many occasions on which at night in bed, I
would be unable to get to sleep on account of worry.  I turned
this way and that in the darkness, and groped mentally for the
familiar sense of that higher mind of my mind which had always
seemed to be close at hand as it were, closing the passage, and
yielding support, but there was no electric current.  A blank was
there instead of IT:  I couldn’t find anything.  Now, at the age
of nearly fifty, my power of getting into connection with it has
entirely left me; and I have to confess that a great help has
gone out of my life.  Life has become curiously dead and <65>
indifferent; and I can now see that my old experience was
probably exactly the same thing as the prayers of the orthodox,
only I did not call them by that name.  What I have spoken of as
’It’ was practically not Spencer’s Unknowable, but just my own
instinctive and individual God, whom I relied upon for higher
sympathy, but whom somehow I have lost.”
Nothing is more common in the pages of religious biography than
the way in which seasons of lively and of difficult faith are
described as alternating.  Probably every religious person has
the recollection of particular crisis in which a directer vision
of the truth, a direct perception, perhaps, of a living God’s
existence, swept in and overwhelmed the languor of the more
ordinary belief.  In James Russell Lowell’s correspondence there
is a brief memorandum of an experience of this kind:–
“I had a revelation last Friday evening.  I was at Mary’s, and
happening to say something of the presence of spirits (of whom, I
said, I was often dimly aware), Mr. Putnam entered into an
argument with me on spiritual matters.  As I was speaking, the
whole system rose up before me like a vague destiny looming from
the Abyss.  I never before so clearly felt the Spirit of God in
me and around rue.  The whole room seemed to me full of God.  The
air seemed to waver to and fro with the presence of Something I
knew not what.  I spoke with the calmness and clearness of a
prophet.  I cannot tell you what this revelation was.  I have not
yet studied it enough.  But I shall perfect it one day, and then
you shall hear it and acknowledge its grandeur."[27]
[27] Letters of Lowell, i. 75.
<66> Here is a longer and more developed experience from a
manuscript communication by a clergyman–I take it from
Starbuck’s manuscript collection:–
“I remember the night, and almost the very spot on the hill-top,
where my soul opened out, as it were, into the Infinite, and
there was a rushing together of the two worlds, the inner and the
outer.  It was deep calling unto deep–the deep that my own
struggle had opened up within being answered by the unfathomable
deep without, reaching beyond the stars.  I stood alone with Him
who had made me, and all the beauty of the world, and love, and
sorrow, and even temptation.  I did not seek Him, but felt the
perfect unison of my spirit with His.  The ordinary sense of
things around me faded.  For the moment nothing but an ineffable
joy and exultation remained.  It is impossible fully to describe
the experience.  It was like the effect of some great orchestra
when all the separate notes have melted into one swelling harmony
that leaves the listener conscious of nothing save that his soul
is being wafted upwards, and almost bursting with its own
emotion.  The perfect stillness of the night was thrilled by a
more solemn silence.  The darkness held a presence that was all
the more felt because it was not seen.  I could not any more have
doubted that HE was there than that I was.  Indeed, I felt myself
to be, if possible, the less real of the two.
“My highest faith in God and truest idea of him were then born in
me.  I have stood upon the Mount of Vision since, and felt the
Eternal round about me.  But never since has there come quite the
same stirring of the heart.  Then, if ever, I believe, I stood
face to face with God, and was born anew of his spirit. There
was, as I recall it, no sudden change of thought or of belief,
except that my early crude conception, had, as it were burst into
flower.  There was no destruction of the old, but a rapid,
wonderful unfolding.  Since that time no discussion that I have
heard of the proofs of God’s existence has been able to shake my
faith.  Having once felt the presence of God’s spirit, I have
never lost it again for long.  My most assuring evidence of his
existence is deeply rooted in that hour of vision in the memory
of that supreme experience, and in the conviction, gained from
reading and reflection, that something the same has come to all
who have found God.  I am aware that it may justly be called
mystical.  I am not enough acquainted with philosophy to defend
it from that or any other charge.  I feel that in writing of it I
have overlaid it with words rather than put it clearly to your
thought.  But, such as it is, I have described it as carefully as
I now am able to do.”
Here is another document, even more definite in character, which,
the writer being a Swiss, I translate from the French
original.[28]
[28] I borrow it, with Professor Flournoy’s permission, from his
rich collection of psychological documents.
“I was in perfect health:  we were on our sixth day of tramping,
and in good training.  We had come the day before from Sixt to
Trient by Buet.  I felt neither fatigue, hunger, nor thirst, and
my state of mind was equally healthy.  I had had at Forlaz good
news from home; I was subject to no anxiety, either near or
remote, for we had a good guide, and there was not a shadow of
uncertainty about the road we should follow.  I can best describe
the condition in which I was by calling it a state of
equilibrium.  When all at once I experienced a feeling of being
raised above myself, I felt the presence of God–I tell of the
thing just as I was conscious of it–as if his goodness and his
power were penetrating me altogether.  The throb of emotion was
so violent that I could barely tell the boys to pass on and not
wait for me.  I then sat down on a stone, unable to stand any
longer, and my eyes overflowed with tears.  I thanked God that in
the course of my life he had taught me to know him, that he
sustained my life and took pity both on the insignificant
creature and on the sinner that I was.  I begged him ardently
that my life might be consecrated to the doing of his will.  I
felt his reply, which was that I should do his will from day to
day in humility and poverty, leaving him, the Almighty God, to be
judge of whether I should some time be called to bear witness
more conspicuously.  Then, slowly, the ecstasy left my heart;
that is, I felt that God had withdrawn the communion which he had
granted, and I was able to walk on, but very slowly, so strongly
was I still possessed by the interior emotion. Besides, I had
wept uninterruptedly for several minutes, my eyes were swollen,
and I did not wish my companions to see me.  The state of ecstasy
may have lasted four or five minutes, although it seemed at the
time to last much longer.  My comrades waited for me ten minutes
at the cross of Barine, but I took about twenty-five or thirty
minutes to join them, for as well as I can remember, they said
that I had kept them back for about half an hour.  The impression
had been so profound that in climbing slowly the slope I asked
myself if it were possible that Moses on Sinai could have had a
more intimate communication with God.  I think it well to add
that in this ecstasy of mine God had neither form, color, odor,
nor taste; moreover, that the feeling of his presence was
accompanied with no determinate localization. It was rather as if
my personality had been transformed by the presence of a
SPIRITUAL SPIRIT.  But the more I seek words to express this
intimate intercourse, the more I feel the impossibility of
describing the thing by any of our usual images.  At bottom the
expression most apt to render what I felt is this:  God was
present, though invisible; he fell under no one of my senses, yet
my consciousness perceived him.”
The adjective “mystical” is technically applied, most often. to
states that are of brief duration.  Of course such hours of
rapture as the last two persons describe are mystical
experiences, of which in a later lecture I shall have much to
say.  Meanwhile here is the abridged record of another mystical
or semi-mystical experience, in a mind evidently framed by nature
for ardent piety.  I owe it to Starbuck’s collection.  The lady
who gives the account is the daughter of a man well known in his
time as a writer against Christianity.  The suddenness of her
conversion shows well how native the sense of God’s presence must
be to certain minds.  She relates that she was brought up in
entire ignorance of Christian doctrine, but, when in Germany,
after being talked to by Christian friends, she read the Bible
and prayed, and finally the plan of salvation flashed upon her
like a stream of light.
<69> “To this day,” she writes, “I cannot understand dallying
with religion and the commands of God.  The very instant I heard
my Father’s cry calling unto me, my heart bounded in recognition.
I ran, I stretched forth my arms, I cried aloud, ’Here, here I
am, my Father.’ Oh, happy child, what should I do?  ’Love me,’
answered my God.  ’I do, I do,’ I cried passionately. ’Come unto
me,’ called my Father.  ’I will,’ my heart panted.  Did I stop to
ask a single question?  Not one.  It never occurred to me to ask
whether I was good enough, or to hesitate over my unfitness, or
to find out what I thought of his church, or . . . to wait until
I should be satisfied.  Satisfied! I was satisfied.  Had I not
found my God and my Father?  Did he not love me?  Had he not
called me?  Was there not a Church into which I might enter?  . .
. Since then I have had direct answers to prayer–so significant
as to be almost like talking with God and hearing his answer. 
The idea of God’s reality has never left me for one moment.”
Here is still another case, the writer being a man aged
twenty-seven, in which the experience, probably almost as
characteristic, is less vividly described:–
“I have on a number of occasions felt that I had enjoyed a period
of intimate communion with the divine.  These meetings came
unasked and unexpected, and seemed to consist merely in the
temporary obliteration of the conventionalities which usually
surround and cover my life. . . .  Once it was when from the
summit of a high mountain I looked over a gashed and corrugated
landscape extending to a long convex of ocean that ascended to
the horizon, and again from the same point when I could see
nothing beneath me but a boundless expanse of white cloud, on the
blown surface of which a few high peaks, including the one I was
on, seemed plunging about as if they were dragging their anchors.
What I felt on these occasions was a temporary loss of my own
identity, accompanied by an illumination which revealed to me a
deeper significance than I had been wont to attach to life.  It
is in this that I find my justification for saying that I have
enjoyed communication with God.  Of course the absence of such a
being as this would be chaos. I cannot conceive of life without
its presence.”
Of the more habitual and so to speak chronic sense of God’s
presence the following sample from Professor Starbuck’s
manuscript collection may serve to give an idea.  It is from a
man aged forty-nine–probably thousands of unpretending
Christians would write an almost identical account.
“God is more real to me than any thought or thing or person.  I
feel his presence positively, and the more as I live in closer
harmony with his laws as written in my body and mind.  I feel him
in the sunshine or rain; and awe mingled with a delicious
restfulness most nearly describes my feelings.  I talk to him as
to a companion in prayer and praise, and our communion is
delightful.  He answers me again and again, often in words so
clearly spoken that it seems my outer ear must have carried the
tone, but generally in strong mental impressions.  Usually a text
of Scripture, unfolding some new view of him and his love for me,
and care for my safety.  I could give hundreds of instances, in
school matters, social problems, financial difficulties, etc. 
That he is mine and I am his never leaves me, it is an abiding
joy.  Without it life would be a blank, a desert, a shoreless,
trackless waste.”
I subjoin some more examples from writers of different ages and
sexes.  They are also from Professor Starbuck’s collection, and
their number might be greatly multiplied.  The first is from a
man twenty-seven years old:–
“God is quite real to me.  I talk to him and often get answers.
Thoughts sudden and distinct from any I have been entertaining
come to my mind after asking God for his direction.  Something
over a year ago I was for some weeks in the direst perplexity.
When the trouble first appeared before me I was dazed, but before
long (two or three hours) I could hear distinctly a passage of
Scripture:  ’My grace is sufficient for thee.’  Every time my
thoughts turned to the trouble I could hear this quotation.  I
don’t think I ever doubted the existence of God, or had him drop
out of my consciousness.  God has frequently stepped into my
affairs very perceptibly, and I feel that he directs many little
details all the time.  But on two or three occasions he has
ordered ways for me very contrary to my ambitions and plans.”
Another statement (none the less valuable psychologically for
being so decidedly childish) is that of a boy of seventeen:–
“Sometimes as I go to church, I sit down, join in the service,
and before I go out I feel as if God was with me, right side of
me, singing and reading the Psalms with me. . . . And then again
I feel as if I could sit beside him, and put my arms around him,
kiss him, etc.  When I am taking Holy Communion at the altar, I
try to get with him and generally feel his presence.”
I let a few other cases follow at random:–
“God surrounds me like the physical atmosphere.  He is closer to
me than my own breath.  In him literally I live and move and have
my being."–
“There are times when I seem to stand in his very presence, to
talk with him.  Answers to prayer have come, sometimes direct and
overwhelming in their revelation of his presence and powers. 
There are times when God seems far off, but this is always my own
fault."–
“I have the sense of a presence, strong, and at the same time
soothing, which hovers over me.  Sometimes it seems to enwrap me
with sustaining arms.”
Such is the human ontological imagination, and such is the
convincingness of what it brings to birth.  Unpicturable beings
are realized, and realized with an intensity almost like that of
an hallucination.  They determine our vital attitude as
decisively as the vital attitude of lovers is determined by the
habitual sense, by which each is haunted, of the other being in
the world.  A lover has notoriously this sense of the continuous
being of his idol, even when his attention is addressed to other
matters and he no longer represents her features.  He cannot
forget her; she uninterruptedly affects him through and through. 
I spoke of the convincingness of these feelings of reality, and I
must dwell a moment longer on that point.  They are as convincing
to those who have them as any direct sensible experiences can be,
and they are, as a rule, much more convincing than results
established by mere logic ever are.  One may indeed be entirely
without them; probably more than one of you here present is
without them in any marked degree; but if you do have them, and
have them at all strongly, the probability is that you cannot
help regarding them as genuine perceptions of truth, as
revelations of a kind of reality which no adverse argument,
however unanswerable by you in words, can expel from your belief.
The opinion opposed to mysticism in philosophy is sometimes
spoken of as RATIONALISM.  Rationalism insists that all our
beliefs ought ultimately to find for themselves articulate
grounds.  Such grounds, for rationalism, must consist of four
things:  (1) definitely statable abstract principles; (2)
definite facts of sensation; (3) definite hypotheses based on
such facts; and (4) definite inferences logically drawn.  Vague
impressions of something indefinable have no place in the
rationalistic system, which on its positive side is surely a
splendid intellectual tendency, for not only are all our
philosophies fruits of it, but physical science (amongst other
good things) is its result.
Nevertheless, if we look on man’s whole mental life as it exists,
on the life of men that lies in them apart from their learning
and science, and that they inwardly and privately follow, we have
to confess that the part of it of which rationalism can give an
account is relatively superficial.  It is the part that has the
prestige undoubtedly, for it has the loquacity, it can challenge
you for proofs, and chop logic, and put you down with words.  But
it will fail to convince or convert you all the same, if your
dumb intuitions are opposed to its conclusions.  If you have
intuitions at all, they come from a deeper level of your nature
than the loquacious level which rationalism inhabits.  Your whole
subconscious life, your impulses, your faiths, your needs, your
divinations, have prepared the premises, of which your
consciousness now feels the weight of the result; and something
in you absolutely KNOWS that that result must be truer than any
logic-chopping rationalistic talk, however clever, that may
contradict it.  This inferiority of the rationalistic level in
founding belief is just as manifest when rationalism argues for
religion as when it argues against it.  That vast literature of
proofs of God’s existence drawn from the order of nature, which a
century ago seemed so overwhelmingly convincing, to-day does
little more than gather dust in libraries, for the simple reason
that our generation has ceased to believe in the kind of God it
argued for.  Whatever sort of a being God may be, we KNOW to-day
that he is nevermore that mere external inventor of
“contrivances” intended to make manifest his “glory” in which our
great-grandfathers took such satisfaction, though just how we
know this we cannot possibly make clear by words either to others
or to ourselves.  I defy any of you here fully to account for
your persuasion that if a God exist he must be a more cosmic and
tragic personage than that Being.
The truth is that in the metaphysical and religious sphere,
articulate reasons are cogent for us only when our inarticulate
feelings of reality have already been impressed in favor of the
same conclusion.  Then, indeed, our intuitions and our reason
work together, and great world-ruling systems, like that of the
Buddhist or of the Catholic philosophy, may grow up. Our
impulsive belief is here always what sets up the original body of
truth, and our articulately verbalized philosophy is but its
showy translation into formulas.  The unreasoned and immediate
assurance is the deep thing in us, the reasoned argument is but a
surface exhibition.  Instinct leads, intelligence does but
follow.  If a person feels the presence of a living God after the
fashion shown by my quotations, your critical arguments, be they
never so superior, will vainly set themselves to change his
faith.
Please observe, however, that I do not yet say that it is BETTER
that the subconscious and non-rational should thus hold primacy
in the religious realm.  I confine myself to simply pointing out
that they do so hold it as a matter of fact.
So much for our sense of the reality of the religious objects.
Let me now say a brief word more about the attitudes they
characteristically awaken.
We have already agreed that they are SOLEMN; and we have seen
reason to think that the most distinctive of them is the sort of
joy which may result in extreme cases from absolute
self-surrender.  The sense of the kind of object to which the
surrender is made has much to do with determining the precise
complexion of the joy; and the whole phenomenon is more complex
than any simple formula allows.  In the literature of the
subject, sadness and gladness have each been emphasized in turn. 
The ancient saying that the first maker of the Gods was fear
receives voluminous corroboration from every age of religious
history; but none the less does religious history show the part
which joy has evermore tended to play.  Sometimes the joy has
been primary; sometimes secondary, being the gladness of
deliverance from the fear. This latter state of things, being the
more complex, is also the more complete; and as we proceed, I
think we shall have abundant reason for refusing to leave out
either the sadness or the gladness, if we look at religion with
the breadth of view which it demands.  Stated in the completest
possible terms, a man’s religion involves both moods of
contraction and moods of expansion of his being.  But the
quantitative mixture and order of these moods vary so much from
one age of the world, from one system of thought, and from one
individual to another, that you may insist either on the dread
and the submission, or on the peace and the freedom as the
essence of the matter, and still remain materially within the
limits of the truth.  The constitutionally sombre and the
constitutionally sanguine onlooker are bound to emphasize
opposite aspects of what lies before their eyes.
The constitutionally sombre religious person makes even of his
religious peace a very sober thing.  Danger still hovers in the
air about it.  Flexion and contraction are not wholly checked. 
It were sparrowlike and childish after our deliverance to explode
into twittering laughter and caper-cutting, and utterly to forget
the imminent hawk on bough.  Lie low, rather, lie low; for you
are in the hands of a living God.  In the Book of Job, for
example, the impotence of man and the omnipotence of God is the
exclusive burden of its author’s mind.  “It is as high as heaven;
what canst thou do?–deeper than hell; what canst thou know?”   
There is an astringent relish about the truth of this conviction
which some men can feel, and which for them is as near an
approach as can be made to the feeling of religious joy.
“In Job,” says that coldly truthful writer, the author of Mark
Rutherford, “God reminds us that man is not the measure of his
creation.  The world is immense, constructed on no plan or theory
which the intellect of man can grasp. It is TRANSCENDENT
everywhere.  This is the burden of every verse, and is the secret
if there be one, of the poem.  Sufficient or insufficient, there
is nothing more. . . .  God is great, we know not his ways.  He
takes from us all we have, but yet if we possess our souls in
patience, we MAY pass the valley of the shadow, and come out in
sunlight again.  We may or we may not! . . . What more have we to
say now than God said from the whirlwind over two thousand five
hundred years ago?"[29]
[29] Mark Rutherford’s Deliverance, London, 1885, pp. 196, 198.
If we turn to the sanguine onlooker, on the other hand, we find
that deliverance is felt as incomplete unless the burden be
altogether overcome and the danger forgotten.  Such onlookers
give us definitions that seem to the sombre minds of whom we have
just been speaking to leave out all the solemnity that makes
religious peace so different from merely animal joys.  In the
opinion of some writers an attitude might be called religious,
though no touch were left in it of sacrifice or submission, no
tendency to flexion, no bowing of the head.  Any “habitual and
regulated admiration,” says Professor J. R. Seeley,[30] “is
worthy to be called a religion"; and accordingly he thinks that
our Music, our Science, and our so-called “Civilization,” as
these things are now organized and admiringly believed in, form
the more genuine religions of our time.  Certainly the
unhesitating and unreasoning way in which we feel that we must
inflict our civilization upon “lower” races, by means of
Hotchkiss guns, etc., reminds one of nothing so much as of the
early spirit of Islam spreading its religion by the sword.
[30] In his book (too little read, I fear), Natural Religion, 3d
edition, Boston, 1886, pp. 91, 122.
In my last lecture I quoted to you the ultra-radical opinion of
Mr. Havelock Ellis, that laughter of any sort may be considered a
religious exercise, for it bears witness to the soul’s
emancipation.  I quoted this opinion in order to deny its
adequacy.  But we must now settle our scores more carefully with
this whole optimistic way of thinking.  It is far too complex to
be decided off-hand.  I propose accordingly that we make of
religious optimism the theme of the next two lectures.
Continue...

This electronic book of The Varieties of Religious Experience (A Study in Human Nature) by William James is in the public domain.
This page has been created by Philipp Lenssen.
Page last updated on December 2003. Also see Part II of this book.
Complete book. Authorama - Classic Literature, free of copyright. About...
The Varieties of Religious ExperienceBy William JamesAt Amazon
